This study describes the results of an analysis of the relationship between local public health agency performance and health outcomes. Findings support the model that local public health agency performance affects community health status, and depending on the outcome, performance contributions vary. New hypotheses are offered that could help determine how system performance affects health outcomes.

There is evidence that newborn babies feel pain even at the lowest gestational ages when they can survive. Because sweet solutions such as sucrose, given orally, may relieve pain in neonates, we decided to compare the effects of two concentrations of glucose (normally used for intravenous infusions) and of breast milk in a randomized controlled trial in 120 babies requiring heel-prick tests. Glucose solutions and breast milk are readily available in the neonatal department. No other treatment was given. Our results strongly suggest that 1 ml of a 30% glucose solution given orally alleviates mild pain significantly and can be used for this purpose in newborns. Breast milk and 10% glucose did not have a similar effect.

In a randomized clinical trial, 87 patients with inoperable, extensive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were randomized to receive either combination chemotherapy (cisplatin at 70 mg/m2 intravenously [i.v.] on day 1 and etoposide at 100 mg/m2 i.v. on day 1 and 200 mg/m2 orally on days 2 and 3) or symptomatic treatment. No statistically significant differences in survival time were found between the two treatment techniques. A major problem in the interpretation of the results was the use of semicurative radiation therapy (3000 to 4200 cGy) to the primary tumor and mediastinum, which was given with symptomatic intent. Three long-term survivors were seen in the latter group.
PURPOSE: The Avastin in Gastric Cancer (AVAGAST) trial was a multinational, randomized, placebo-controlled trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of adding bevacizumab to capecitabine-cisplatin in the first-line treatment of advanced gastric cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received bevacizumab 7.5 mg/kg or placebo followed by cisplatin 80 mg/m(2) on day 1 plus capecitabine 1,000 mg/m(2) twice daily for 14 days every 3 weeks. Fluorouracil was permitted in patients unable to take oral medications. Cisplatin was given for six cycles; capecitabine and bevacizumab were administered until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary end point was overall survival (OS). Log-rank test was used to test the OS difference.
RESULTS: In all, 774 patients were enrolled; 387 were assigned to each treatment group (intention-to-treat population), and 517 deaths were observed. Median OS was 12.1 months with bevacizumab plus fluoropyrimidine-cisplatin and 10.1 months with placebo plus fluoropyrimidine-cisplatin (hazard ratio 0.87; 95% CI, 0.73 to 1.03; P = .1002). Both median progression-free survival (6.7 v 5.3 months; hazard ratio, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.68 to 0.93; P = .0037) and overall response rate (46.0% v 37.4%; P = .0315) were significantly improved with bevacizumab versus placebo. Preplanned subgroup analyses revealed regional differences in efficacy outcomes. The most common grade 3 to 5 adverse events were neutropenia (35%, bevacizumab plus fluoropyrimidine-cisplatin; 37%, placebo plus fluoropyrimidine-cisplatin), anemia (10% v 14%), and decreased appetite (8% v 11%). No new bevacizumab-related safety signals were identified.
CONCLUSION: Although AVAGAST did not reach its primary objective, adding bevacizumab to chemotherapy was associated with significant increases in progression-free survival and overall response rate in the first-line treatment of advanced gastric cancer.

We utilize the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (1964) mechanism to estimate the willingness to pay for clean drinking water technology in northern Ghana. The BDM mechanism has attractive properties for empirical research, allowing us to directly estimate demand, compute heterogeneous treatment effects, and study the screening and causal effects of prices with minor modifications to a standard field experiment setting. We demonstrate the implementation of BDM along these three dimensions, compare it to the standard take-it-or-leave it method for eliciting willingness to pay, and discuss practical issues for implementing the mechanism in true field settings
We conducted a study on 140 patients who sought advice at hospital after a non-occupational exposure. The full 28-day course of prophylactic antiretroviral therapy was completed by 109 patients. No HIV contamination was observed. Factors associated with suboptimal adherence were African ethnicity [odds ratio (OR) 13.3, 2.02-87.54] and oral sexual intercourse (OR 8.35, 1.66-41.99). Compliance with prophylactic antiretroviral therapy can be increased by addressing social and psychological barriers to adherence.

CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed once-a-day highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. The authors concluded that some once-a-day HAART regimens had a virological efficacy at least similar to that of conventional HAART, an overall CD4 cell increase of at least 114 lymphocytes/microlitre, and good tolerability. The conclusions of this well-conducted systematic review are supported by the evidence presented.
The effect of nutritional status on protective efficacy of a live attenuated human rotavirus vaccine (RIX4414) was studied. Vaccine protection was evaluated through a secondary analysis of data from an efficacy study conducted in Brazil, Mexico, and Venezuela. Vaccine efficacy against rotavirus gastroenteritis (RVGE) was similar in well-nourished and malnourished infants: 74.1% (95% confidence interval [CI], 52.2%-86.2%) and 73% (95% CI, 11.2%-92.3%) for severe RVGE and 60.9% (95% CI, 37.4%-75.4%) and 61.2% (95% CI, 10.4%-83.1%) for RVGE of any severity, respectively. RIX4414 significantly decreased the rate of RVGE regardless of nutritional status, which suggests that this patient group can also benefit from rotavirus vaccination. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRY: e-Track 444563-006, NCT00385320 (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov).
Studies on psychiatric disorders in Brazil have shown high prevalence rates, both in the community and in primary care centers. However, psychiatric assessments carried out by interviewers have some inherent problems which influence inter-observer reliability. There is great potential for the use of computerized interviews. This article discusses some advantages of this kind of assessment, and indicates a need for investigation into its applicability to Brazilian health care settings.

To test the effect of inhibiting serotonin uptake on voluntary alcohol intake, 20 alcohol-dependent males were housed on a locked hospital ward with 60-ml drinks of 97.5 proof alcohol available in a fixed interval drinking decision paradigm 13 times each day. After a 3-day, single-blind placebo baseline period, 10 subjects each received the serotonin uptake blocker fluoxetine (up to 80 mg po daily) or placebo double-blind for 28 days. The fluoxetine group had a 14% lower alcohol intake during the 1st week only, associated with a lower proportion of requests for alcohol and less craving for alcohol (as rated by research staff). There were no significant effects in later weeks, nor any differences in scores on the Hamilton Depression and Anxiety Scales or the Hopkins Symptom Checklist.
Fistulae-in-ano remains a significant surgical problem due to the limitations pertinent to accurate assessment and the magnitude, shortcomings and side effects of the various procedures currently employed for their management. Six consecutive fistulae-in-ano patients (males, age range 30 to 58 years) were successfully treated by KTP laser (20-watt continuous aim for 20 to 30 seconds delivering a total energy of 400 to 600 joules) with rapid solidification fibrin glue then followed up for 3 months without recurrence. This approach offers a simple, expeditious and effective treatment for fistulae-in-ano thereby overcoming many of the restrictions associated with other methods.
The introduction of tiered reimbursement rates in 1997 did not substantially affect the food and nutrient composition of meals offered by Tier 2 providers in the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP). The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 mandated a tiered reimbursement structure designed to target benefits more narrowly to low-income children and called for a study of its effects on program participation and child nutrition. PRWORA reduced reimbursement rates for Tier 2 providers (providers who are not low-income themselves and do not live in low-income areas). According to our 1999 study, Tier 2 providers neither cut back on meals and snacks served nor offered less nutritious foods, despite initial concerns about how Tier 2 providers would react to the reduced rates. Tier 2 meals have not compromised the overall goal of the CACFP meal component requirements: to provide a mix of foods that make an important contribution to a child's major nutritional needs.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a highly cost-effective treatment for symptoms of the menopause such as hot flushes (flashes). A number of economic evaluations have indicated that it may also be a cost-effective therapy for the prevention of cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis. However, these evaluations are based on the premise that HRT will reduce cardiovascular disease by 30 to 50%. Recent evidence casts doubt on its effectiveness at preventing cardiovascular disease, certainly as a secondary preventive therapy. Furthermore, HRT is likely to increase the incidence of breast cancer. If the effect of HRT on the cardiovascular system is slight or nonexistent, but its effect on breast cancer is modest or strong, then HRT is unlikely to be a cost-effective treatment for asymptomatic women at low risk of osteoporosis. However, the unwanted effects of HRT on the breast may be significantly reduced by targeting therapy to those women with low bone mass and who have other risk factors for fracture. Such a strategy is likely to be more cost effective than a strategy which allows asymptomatic women with low fracture risk to take HRT in the long term. As selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) aggravate menopausal symptoms they are not likely to be an alternative for most perimenopausal women. Therefore, SERMs are more likely to be a competitor to existing and forthcoming bisphosphonates rather than HRT.

Budesonide 400 micrograms daily, in nonsteroid-dependent asthma, can produce improvements in airway responsiveness and clinical asthma severity, with some patients returning to normal responsiveness and becoming asymptomatic. This study examined whether similar improvements occur when asthmatics, who are dependent upon inhaled steroids, take either a regular maintenance dose of inhaled steroid or twice that amount for a year. Thirty two asthmatics were each stabilized on the minimum amount of inhaled steroid that would keep symptoms non-troublesome. In a double-blind, randomized manner, half were assigned to remain on a maintenance dose (MD) and the rest received twice that dose (MDx2) for one year. Before and monthly throughout the study, airway responsiveness to methacholine was measured and clinical asthma severity assessed by questionnaire, inhaled bronchodilator use and number of asthma exacerbations. There was a significant improvement in airway responsiveness and clinical asthma severity in both treatment groups. Those on MDx2 showed the greatest improvement but the difference between the two groups did not reach significance. This study provides strong evidence that prolonged use of inhaled steroids is associated with improvement in airway responsiveness and clinical asthma severity in inhaled steroid-dependent asthma with a suggestion that the improvements are dose related.

OBJECTIVE: This study examined the treatment response of patients with first-episode schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder and potential predictors of response.
METHOD: First-episode patients were assessed on measures of psychopathology, cognition, social functioning, and biological parameters and treated according to a standardized algorithm.
RESULTS: One hundred eighteen patients (52% male, mean age 25.2 years) entered the study. The cumulative percentage of patients responding by 1 year was 87%; the median time to response was 9 weeks. The following variables were significantly associated with less likelihood of response to treatment: male sex, obstetric complications, more severe hallucinations and delusions, poorer attention at baseline, and the development of parkinsonism during antipsychotic treatment. Variables not significantly related to treatment response were diagnosis (schizophrenia versus schizoaffective disorder), premorbid functioning, duration of psychotic symptoms prior to study entry, baseline disorganization, negative and depressive symptoms, baseline motor function, akathisia and dystonia during treatment, growth hormone and homovanillic acid measures, psychotic symptom activation to methylphenidate, and magnetic resonance measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with first-episode schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have high rates of response to antipsychotic treatment; there are specific clinical and pathobiologic predictors of response.

Regular treatment with beta 2-adrenergic agonists is controversial in bronchial asthma. To investigate whether beta 2-adrenergic agonists can be used safely if associated with low doses of inhaled steroids, for a short period, without a deterioration of asthma control, we have examined 24 mild asthmatics. In a parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 1 week of run-in and run-out period framed 3 weeks of treatment. All patients received inhaled beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP 250 micrograms t.i.d.); after 1 week, 12 patients inhaled 400 micrograms of broxaterol and 12 patients received placebo t.i.d. FVC, FEV1, PD20-FEV1 methacholine, morning and evening PEF, and PEF amplitude % mean were measured before, during, and after treatment. No significant changes were noted in patients receiving inhaled broxaterol. There were no differences in symptoms and the use of rescue medication (salbutamol spray). We conclude that short-term regular treatment with beta 2-adrenergic agonists is not associated with a deterioration in asthma control in mild asthmatics inhaling low doses of steroids.

The long-term outcome of algodystrophy is unknown. Ten years after Colles' fracture, 26% of 55 cases showed features of the syndrome. The finding of poor finger function three months following the fracture correlated significantly with the presence of components of algodystrophy after ten years.

The benefits of polychemotherapy in advanced (Stage III) non-small-cell bronchogenic carcinoma remain uncertain. In attempt to answer the important question whether treatment improves well-being and survival in these patients, we did a prospective, randomized, single-blind study to compare polychemotherapy to a placebo. Thirty-nine consecutive patients were enrolled. Twenty received a drug combination consisting of: methotrexate, doxorubicine hydrochloride (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, and lomustine (CCNU) (MACC). The other group (19 subjects) received a placebo physically comparable to MACC. The two groups were initially comparable in terms of age, sex, clinical status, and tumor burden. In the treated group, seven patients had a radiologic response (more than 50% reduction in the tumor size), and the tumor stabilized in an additional five subjects. There were no responders in the placebo group. Median survival was 30.5 weeks for the MACC group compared to 8.5 weeks in the placebo group (P less than 0.0005, Gehan-Wilcoxon). We conclude that polychemotherapy (in this case MACC) significantly benefits patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

AIM: To describe the nature and prevalence of hearing loss in Fabry disease, and its response to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsidase alfa. METHODS: Fifteen male patients with Fabry disease were enrolled in a randomized, double-blind study and received placebo (n = 8) or ERT (n = 7) with agalsidase alfa for 6 months. This was followed by an open-label extension of 36 months thus far. Alongside this trial, an additional eight men and two women have so far received open-label ERT for between 6 and 30 months. Pure-tone audiometry, impedance audiometry and otoacoustic emission testing were performed at 0 (baseline), 6, 18, 30 and 42 months. RESULTS: Nine patients (36%) had bilateral and ten (40%) had unilateral high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). Three (12%) had unilateral middle ear effusions with conductive losses persisting beyond 6 months. Only five patients (20%) had normal hearing. The high-frequency SNHL deteriorated over the first 6 months in both placebo and active treatment groups by a median 6.3 dB (p < 0.0001, Wilcoxon matched-pairs). This hearing loss subsequently improved above baseline by 1.5 dB at 18 months (p = 0.07), by 5.0 dB at 30 months (p = 0.006) and by 4.0 dB at 42 months (p = 0.01). CONCLUSION: Significant hearing loss, usually high-frequency SNHL, is a common manifestation of Fabry disease in adults. Alpha-galactosidase A replacement therapy with agalsidase alfa appears to reverse the hearing deterioration in these patients. This improvement, however, is gradual, suggesting the need for long-term ERT.
The T stage is an important criterion for determining prognosis in esophageal carcinoma. Endosonography, although established as a highly accurate method in preoperative determination of the T stage, may be less reliable in non-traversable tumor stenoses. In a comparative prospective study, 41 patients with carcinoma of the esophagus were investigated to determine the role of tumor stenosis on the accuracy of endosonography in preoperative T staging. The results were correlated with the histology of the resected specimen. The overall accuracy in T staging with endosonography was 76%, compared with 49% in computed tomography. T staging results of endosonography were good in easily and non-traversable stenoses (92%, 87% respectively), but lower accuracy was obtained in stenoses which could be traversed only with difficulty (46%). Computed tomography was inferior to endosonography in all three groups of patients. The high accuracy of endosonography in non-traversable stenoses might be due to the fact that all tumors were in an advanced stage (T3 or T4). When passage of the echoendoscope proves difficult, the low focal distance between the ultrasonic transducer and tumor may hamper clear visualisation of the wall layers and tumor penetration depth. These limitations of endosonography should stimulate further efforts in improving ultrasonic resolution in these cases.

CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated the effectiveness of community health workers in the care of people with hypertension and concluded that interventions that involved community health workers can improve rates of blood pressure control, particularly in under-served diverse racial/ethnic populations. Other significant health outcomes were reported. The review had no major flaws and the conclusions are likely to be reliable.
BACKGROUND: The aim of this work was to modify the embryo transfer technique to prevent expulsion of the embryos by exerting gentle mechanical pressure on the cervix using the vaginal speculum.
METHODS: A total of 639 infertile patients undergoing ICSI were prospectively randomized into two groups using sealed dark envelopes. In the study group (n=325) the screw of the vaginal speculum was loosened in order to exert a gentle pressure on the portiovaginalis of the cervix before ejecting the embryos, and was maintained for 7 min afterwards. In the control group (n=314) no pressure was applied on the cervix during embryo transfer and the vaginal speculum was removed after transferring the embryos.
RESULTS: The clinical pregnancy rate was significantly higher in the study group than in the control group [207/325 (67%) versus 150/314 (47.8%); odds ratio (OR) 1.39; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.11-1.74]. The implantation rate was also significantly higher in the study group [304/913 (33.3%) versus 198/920 (21.5%); OR 1.54; 95% CI 1.26-1.89].
CONCLUSIONS: Applying gentle mechanical pressure on the portiovaginalis of the cervix using the vaginal speculum during and after transferring the embryos significantly improved clinical pregnancy and implantation rates.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of sibutramine on weight and glycaemic control in obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The authors concluded that sibutramine may help to improve glycaemic control because it reduces weight. Inadequate reporting of the quality assessment, characteristics of the included studies, drop-outs and some review methods makes interpretation of the evidence difficult.
The pentavalent human-bovine reassortant rotavirus vaccine is indicated as a 3-dose series with first dose administered orally at 6 to 12 weeks with subsequent doses at 4 to 10 week intervals. In pre-licensure phase III trials, the majority followed this schedule, but there were 2956 instances where infants received a dose of pentavalent human-bovine reassortant rotavirus vaccine/placebo >10 weeks after the previous dose. Among this subset, the efficacy against any severity of disease, the reduction in utilization of healthcare resources and the safety profile after vaccination were comparable with overall results.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was evidence that combined extracts of cannabis (delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol) may provide therapeutic benefit for spasticity symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis. In light of the good quality of the included trials, the authors' cautious conclusions appear to be appropriate, although the small number of trials should be borne in mind.
Two treatments for fistula-in-ano were compared in a randomized trial. Times of healing were significantly shorter when the fistula was laid open (median 34 days, n = 26) than after excision (41 days, n = 21) (P less than 0.02). Revisional surgery was necessary before healing could be obtained in 3 of 26 patients after lay open operations and 2 of 21 after excision. Recurrence rates within 1 year were similar (3/24 and 2/21).
When 251 relapsing-remitting patients with multiple sclerosis were randomized to receive daily subcutaneous injections of glatiramer acetate, previously called copolymer 1 (Copaxone; n = 125) or placebo (n = 126) for 24 months, there were no laboratory abnormalities associated with glatiramer acetate treatment and it was well tolerated with few side effects. Patients receiving glatiramer acetate had significantly fewer relapses and were more likely to be neurologically improved, whereas those receiving placebo were more likely to worsen. This study was extended for 1 to 11 months (mean of 5.2 months for the glatiramer acetate group and 5.9 months for the placebo group). The blinding and study conditions used during the core 24-month study were unchanged throughout the extension. The results of this extension study confirm the excellent tolerance and safety profile of glatiramer acetate for injection. The clinical benefit of glatiramer acetate for both the relapse rate and for neurologic disability was sustained at the end of the extension trial.
Copolymer I (Copazone) was evaluated in a multicenter, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial at 11 universities. Two hundred and fifty-one relapsing-remitting ambulatory MS patients were randomized to receive 20 mg of copolymer I or placebo by daily subcutaneous injection for approximately 30 months. At conclusion, the copolymer I group had 32% fewer relapses (P = 0.002) and significantly more were relapse-free (P = 0.035). Significantly, more patients were receiving copolymer I had improved during the study, while more patients on placebo showed neurological decline (P = 0.001). There were few side effects and no drug related laboratory abnormalities. Copolymer I is being considered by North American and European regulatory agencies for approval as commercially available agent for the control of multiple sclerosis.
We found Cop 1 to be effective and relatively safe in a previous (exacerbating-remitting) clinical trial. This current trial involves 106 chronic-progressive patients. The major end point, confirmed progression of 1.0 or 1.5 units (depending on baseline disability) on the Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale, was observed in nine (17.6%) treated and 14 (25.5%) control patients. The differences between the overall survival curves were not significant. Progression rates at 12 and 24 months were higher for the placebo group (p = 0.088) with 2-year probabilities of progressing of 20.4% for Cop 1 and 29.5% for placebo. We found a significant difference at 24 months between placebo and Cop 1 at one but not the other center. Two-year progression rates for two secondary end points, unconfirmed progression, and progression of 0.5 EDSS units, (p = 0.03) are significant.
The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of n-butyl-cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (Liquiband) with nonabsorbable monofilament sutures for laparoscopic port site closure. Adult patients having elective laparoscopic procedures were randomly allocated to wound closure with sutures or tissue adhesive. End points included skin closure time, wound dressing requirements, wound complications, and cosmesis, assessed at discharge, 4 to 6 weeks and 3 months. Seventy-eight patients randomized to receive sutures and 76 to receive tissue adhesive were eligible for final analysis. Mean closure time was significantly longer for sutures (220 vs. 125 s, P < 0.001). Fewer dressings were required in the tissue adhesive group immediately postoperatively (21% vs. 97%, P < 0.001) and at discharge (24% vs. 82%, P < 0.001). There were no significant differences in wound complications or in cosmesis at either 4 to 6 weeks or at 3 months. Tissue adhesive for laparoscopic port site closure offers potential savings with respect to time and has comparable wound complication rates and cosmetic outcomes when compared with nonabsorbable monofilament sutures.
BACKGROUND: The patient's view of the outcome after phlebectomy is mainly dependent on the cosmetic result. OBJECTIVE: To compare 5-0 monofilament sutures with tapes and tissue adhesive for wound closure after varicose vein surgery. METHODS: Seventy-nine patients undergoing varicose vein surgery were prospectively randomized in three groups (tissue adhesive, sutures, tape) for skin closure and compared. The follow-up 1 year postoperatively was done by a senior dermatologist who was blinded in the method of skin closure. RESULTS: The cosmetic outcome showed little advantage for the suture group. Taping the incisions is faster than suturing them but without significance; closure with tissue adhesive takes nearly the double of time. The closure for one incision with tissue adhesive is 40 times more expensive than with tapes and 14 times more expensive than with sutures. CONCLUSION: This study failed to demonstrate an advantage of tissue adhesive and tapes over monofilament sutures for skin closure after phlebectomy.
The use of tissue adhesives has been widely studied since the 1960s. Since then they have found use in specialties like plastic surgery, neurosurgery, ENT surgery and dental surgery. Several papers have reported their safe use, both clinically and experimentally, particularly of the newer homologue n-butyl/2-cyanoacrylate (Histoacryl). In this study 43 patients (46 wounds) whose operations involved a groin incision were randomised into two groups for skin closure either with Dexon subcuticular suture (23 wounds) or Histoacryl glue (23 wounds). We found that both sets of wounds healed well with no wound infections or excessive inflammation when assessed at one week and four weeks. However the glued wounds had consistently better cosmesis scores (mean score 4.71 at four weeks) compared to the subcuticular Dexon wounds (mean score 4.00 at four weeks) and P value of less than 0.05. We feel that there is a place for tissue adhesives in skin closure for some general surgical wounds.
OBJECT: Evaluation of low dose radiation therapy to the wet-type age-related macular degeneration (AMD) located at the fovea centralis. CASES AND METHODS: Patients were irradiated with 10 fractions of 2 Gy external beam or just observed. Between the treated(39) and untreated (31) cases, there was no significant difference in gender, age, initial visual acuity, or size of the neovascular membrane. RESULTS: With the follow-up of 12 months, the visual acuity was significantly well preserved and the size of the neovascular membrane was decreased. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that low dose irradiation is effective for the wet-type AMD of the stage we treated in the present study.
AIM: To evaluate the efficacy of radiotherapy in the treatment of subfoveal classic and occult choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) under strict fixation control. METHODS: Twenty-seven eyes of 27 patients with subfoveal CNV as a result of AMD were treated with a total dose of 20 Gy in 10 fractions (10 well-defined, 17 occult). Fixation monitoring was achieved by installing a TV camera with an attached fixation light 3 cm from the cornea of the eye being treated. Visual acuity and fluorescein angiography were obtained before and 6 months after treatment. Fifteen eyes of 15 patients served as controls (4 well-defined, 11 occult). RESULTS: After 6 months the treated group showed an average decrease in visual acuity of 27%; the control group experienced a decrease of 31%. Membrane size increased by 56% in the treated group and by 28% in the control group. There was no statistically significant difference. Within the subgroup analysis, however, patients with classic CNV suffered significantly less visual loss than in the control group. CONCLUSION: Radiation therapy under optimized treatment conditions by fixation monitoring failed to control further growth in membrane size in both classic and occult CNV. Regarding visual acuity, however, patients with classic CNV seem to benefit from radiation treatment compared to the natural course.
Clinical evaluation of the Postpartum Nova-T or Nova-T-PP (a Nova-T IUD adapted for postpartum insertion) was based on 412 insertions and showed that this model--besides being effective and safe--had a low expulsion rate (7.2% at 1 year). To prove that the Nova-T-PP's low expulsion rate is indeed the result of its special design, a randomized trial was conducted to compare the Nova-T-PP with the parent model (Nova-T) when inserted within 10 minutes of delivery of the placenta. The result of this study (408 insertions, 203 of them Nova-T) indicate that there is no significant difference in expulsion rate between the two IUD models, suggesting that the addition of two extra arms to the original Nova-T model does not improve the retention of the adapted IUD model.
Delta devices, modifications of standard Lippes Loop D and TCu 220C IUDs, were designed for postpartum insertion. A study of the Delta T and the Delta Loop was conducted at Hacettepe University School of Medicine in Ankara, Turkey. The IUDs were randomly allocated to 246 immediately postpartum women (less than 10 min postplacenta). Twelve-month expulsion rates were low for both devices; 3.7 for Delta Loop users and 7.6 for Delta T users.
Low molecular weight heparins are used extensively for thromboprophylaxis. The aim of this study was to compare the activity of the low molecular weight heparin, enoxaparin, 20 mg and 40 mg, given once per day with unfractionated heparin, 7500iu given twice per day, in terms of their anti-Xa activity in puerperal women following caesarean section and with an additional risk factor for venous thromboembolism. Seventeen women were randomised to receive one of the three treatments. The anti-Xa activity associated with each treatment was measured prior to treatment and at 2, 4, 6, 12 and 24 hours. The mean anti-Xa values of the groups receiving enoxaparin, 20 mg and 40 mg, were significantly higher than those of the group receiving unfractionated heparin. There was no difference between the two enoxaparin groups in terms of the anti-Xa activity profiles. This study suggests that the use of enoxaparin is superior to unfractionated heparin in terms of anti-Xa activity.
Despite the established role of foot care education in diabetes management, reports evaluating such interventions are rare. The effectiveness of an intensive foot care intervention programme and a conventional one were therefore compared in Type 2 diabetes. The intensive group showed significantly greater improvements than the conventional group in foot care knowledge (p less than 0.001), compliance with the recommended foot care routine (p = 0.012), and compliance with the initial advice to consult a podiatrist (other than the project podiatrist) for further treatment (p = 0.008). At the first follow-up visit the intensive group also showed a significantly greater reduction in the number of foot problems requiring treatment than the conventional group.
PTFE (Goretex) and modified human umbilical vein (Biograft) vascular grafts were compared in femorodistal popliteal artery bypass surgery in a randomized clinical multicentre trial. During 18 months 104 patients (104 limbs) entered the trial. Twenty-five patients suffered from claudication, 54 suffered rest pain and 25 patients had ulceration or gangrene. The median preoperative ankle-arm blood pressure index was 0 . 34. Twenty-three limbs had 3 patent tibial arteries, 45 limbs had 2 tibial arteries, 31 limbs had 1 tibial artery while 5 limbs had an isolated popliteal segment. Thirty-six of the operations were redo-operations. Fifty-four patients were allocated to PTFE and 50 to umbilical vein. During follow-up (maximum 650 days) 24 PTFE grafts occluded against 12 umbilical veins. The 1-year patency rate was 40 per cent in the PTFE group against 75 per cent in the umbilical vein group (P = 0 . 014, Gehans test). During the first year the PTFE failure rate was on average 3 . 1 times higher than that of the umbilical vein.
To compare efficacy, toxicity, and the pharmacokinetics of the combination of sulphasalazine (SASP) and methotrexate (MTX) vs MTX alone in the treatment of SASP-resistant RA we conducted a controlled open clinical trial. Forty RA patients with active arthritis despite adequate SASP therapy, were allocated randomly to regimes of either SASP+MTX or MTX alone. The patients were evaluated openly by a single observer for 24 weeks. In the first 15 patients using the combination, pharmacokinetics of MTX without and with SASP were studied. Thirty-eight patients completed the trial. The mean decrease in the disease activity score in the group of patients receiving the combination was significantly greater than in the MTX group (-2.6 vs -1.3 respectively). The same pattern was seen concerning the other efficacy variables. There was no difference in the occurrence of toxicity. SASP had no influence on the pharmacokinetics of MTX. In conclusion in this open study the efficacy of the combination of MTX and SASP seems to be superior to MTX alone, the toxicity of both therapies was similar. This effect was not explained by the pharmacokinetics of MTX which were not altered by concomitant SASP administration.
Ketoprofen, 25, 50, and 100 mg, was compared with 90 mg codeine and placebo for relief of pain due to removal of impacted third molar teeth. Treatment was self-administered as a single oral dose under double-blind conditions in five parallel groups established by a random code in healthy young adults. Based on 129 patient evaluations of pain experience and pain relief, ketoprofen was shown to have a more rapid onset and longer duration of action than codeine. In the derived variables of SPID (Sum of Pain Intensity Differences) and TOPAR (Total Pain Relief), all three doses of ketoprofen, with no dose-related differences among them, were found to provide statistically superior analgesia to codeine and placebo. All five treatments were associated with some adverse reactions.
Our purpose was to evaluate the analgesic efficacy and safety of single oral doses of propiram fumarate 50 mg, codeine sulfate 60 mg and placebo in the relief of moderate to severe postoperative pain. One hundred and twenty patients completed a randomized, double-blind, single-dose, stratified, parallel-groups trial and were observed for either 4 or 6 hours. Based upon each of the summary efficacy measures--SPID, % SPID and TOTAL--propiram and codeine were approximately equally effective and both were statistically superior to placebo. Propiram was significantly more effective than codeine at hour 5 for Pain Intensity Difference. Two adverse effects were attributed to propiram. Propiram fumarate 50 mg is an effective oral analgesic similar to codeine sulfate 60 mg, with the possibility of a longer duration of action.
A double-blind, randomized comparison between parenteral gold therapy (PGT) and cyclosporin A (CyA) vs PGT and placebo during 6 months was performed in 40 RA patients experiencing a decreasing effect of ongoing PGT. Patients' overall assessment of health was the only efficacy variable significantly better in the CyA- and PGT-treated vs the placebo- and PGT-treated group. Higher blood pressure and more signs of renal impairment were found during the 6 months treatment in the former compared with the latter group. Six months after the end of the combination therapy, a higher potassium value in the CyA-treated group was the only difference. In conclusion, no effects additional to those expected with single-drug therapy or additional risks of side-effects of either drug were found when combining low-dose CyA with ongoing PGT in RA patients with long disease duration.
Early fetal biparietal diameter (BPD) measurements were obtained with ultrasound in 1062 women attending for antenatal care; a random half had the results withheld from the obstetricians. Of the 1026 women who were sure of the dates of their last normal menstrual period, 829 (81%) were found to have appropriate biparietal diameter measurements, in 3% the pregnancy was more than 2 weeks further advanced and in 14% more than 2 weeks less than calculated. In 30% of the women whose results were intended to be withheld, the code had to be broken because of clinical concern. There were no differences in fetal outcome (birthweight centile, Apgar score at 1 min and perinatal mortality) in the women whose BPD results were known compared with those whose results were withheld from the obstetrician. But a significantly larger number of labours were induced for suspected growth retardation when the gestational age was known.
100 cases of various types of epilepsy, epilepsy Ning treatment with Western sodium valproate treatment of 50 cases for the control group. Results: The total effective rate was 100% in the control group the total efficiency of 96% between two groups was significantly different (P <0.05).
This study examined the efficiency of health care delivery systems in 24 OECD countries. Practicing physicians, practicing nurses, inpatient beds, and pharmaceuticals were considered as inputs to treat populations of various age groups. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) was utilized to calculate efficiency. We also calculated input efficiency that should be helpful in determining excess number of physicians, nurses, inpatient beds, and pharmaceuticals consumed. Institutional arrangements affect efficiency: public-contract and public-integrated countries are more efficient than public-reimbursement countries. Countries in which physicians are paid in wages and salaries and countries with capitation have higher efficiency than fee-for-service countries. Countries in which a primary care physician acts as a gatekeeper are also more efficient than countries without gatekeepers.

Low molecular weight heparins have stimulated much interest because of their supposedly more selective action on Xa factor. A randomized study in 50 patients compared efficacy of low doses of a standard heparin, calciparin (5,000 IU/8 h) with that of a low molecular weight heparin, fragmine (Kabi 2165) (5,000 anti-Xa U/24 h), in the prophylaxis of postoperative thrombosis after oncologic surgery. Three of 25 patients receiving calciparin developed pulmonary embolism, as against one of 25 treated with fragmine who developed a periphlebitis. Hemorrhagic complications were comparable in the two groups. Anti-Xa activity was significantly higher in the fragmine group, whereas platelet counts, cephalin times with activator and anti-IIa activity were similar. These findings indicate equal efficacy of fragmine and calciparin in the prophylaxis of post-oncology surgery venous thrombosis.

This article explores Pakistani-born persons' expectations regarding health encounters and health-worker style, and consequences for communication. It is part of a larger qualitative study involving both health workers and Pakistani-born persons in Oslo. An earlier publication based on interviews with health workers revealed dilemmas around role enactment, and described how they perceived Pakistani-born patients to expect an authoritarian health-worker style. The present article is based on interviews with patients and reveals that Pakistani-born diabetics expect empathy and care rather than an authoritarian style. The interviews indicate that lack of trust and diverging role expectations may be understood in the context of class and level of education, as well as ethnicity. Responding to theories about empowerment work and the dual impact of ethnicity and class, the study indicates that health workers should admit their professional expert role, and combine this role with a caring attitude in order to build trust.

30 patients with chemotherapy-related leukopenia (white cells 1.0 x 10(9)/l or lower) and fever (temperature 38.5 degrees C or higher) were treated in a double-blind randomised trial with standard antibiotics and 7 days of intravenously administered recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF, 2.8 micrograms/kg per day) or placebo. GM-CSF administration resulted in a faster percentage increase of peripheral neutrophil count after 2 and 3 days of treatment, except in patients treated with ablative chemotherapy and autologous bone-marrow transplantation. However, GM-CSF did not shorten the period of fever or antibiotic administration. No side-effects were observed; in particular tumour necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-6 did not increase in the 5 GM-CSF patients tested. These data suggest that a subgroup of patients with chemotherapy-related leukopenia and fever may benefit from GM-CSF treatment in view of the observed effects on neutrophil count.

By focusing exclusively on consumer benefit, previous studies of the effects of managed care have ignored important hospital efficiency gains. This study uses the HCUP sample of hospitals for 1992-1996 to estimate a stochastic frontier model of hospital technical efficiency. After controlling for hospital and market area variables, the study finds strong evidence that increased managed care insurance in a given market is associated with improved technical efficiency in the area's hospitals, especially in tertiary cases. Using Battese and Coelli's one-stage method (1995), the coefficients estimates are more efficient than for two-stage methods found in the literature.

Acute care hospitals have increasingly been forming local strategic hospital alliances (SHAs), which consume considerable resources in forming and may affect the competitiveness of provider markets. This research shows that SHAs and market factors, which have been perceived to be threats to hospitals, are related to hospitals' financial performance. Among the findings are that SHA members have higher net revenues but that they are not more effective at cost control. Nor do the higher net revenues result in higher cash flow. However, increasing SHA penetration in a market is related to lower net revenues per case. In addition, the penetration of private health maintenance organizations in markets is associated with lower revenues and expenses.

We analyze a sample of Washington State hospitals with a stochastic frontier panel data model, specifying the cost function as a generalized Leontief function which, according to a Hausman test, performs better in this case than the translog form. A one-stage FGLS estimation procedure which directly models the inefficiency effects improves the efficiency of our estimates. We find that hospitals with higher casemix indices or more beds are less efficient while for-profit hospitals and those with higher proportion of Medicare patient days are more efficient. Relative to the most efficient hospital, the average hospital is only about 67% efficient.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that limited data suggested that adding midazolam to other intrathecal agents could safely reduce perioperative nausea, vomiting and pain during caesarean delivery, but further safety data is required. While the review was generally well-conducted and the conclusion reflected the evidence, it was unclear why caesarean delivery was highlighted when no analysis was conducted for this specific group. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared intravenous tranexamic acid with placebo for reducing blood loss in total hip and knee arthroplasty. The authors concluded that intravenous tranexamic acid reduces blood loss and the need for transfusion without increasing the risk of complications. Differences between the included studies may mean that the results of the review are not reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the efficacy and tolerability of lactobacilli for the treatment and prevention of bacterial vaginosis and prevention of urinary tract infection, but definitive conclusions could not be drawn due to limitations in the identified evidence. Due to flaws in the review process, the reliability of the authors' conclusions is unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review of observational studies concluded that epidemiological evidence for a protective effect of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs against prostate cancer was suggestive but not conclusive. The review was generally well-conducted apart from the absence of a formal validity assessment. The cautious conclusion is probably reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the utility of the protein:creatinine ratio in a random urine sample to rule out proteinuria as defined by 24-hour urine protein measurement. The authors' conclusion that the protein:creatinine ratio can be used to rule out proteinuria was somewhat optimistic given the data presented. Limitations in the search strategy and methodology used in the review could also cast doubt upon its findings.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that the available evidence did not support the use of remifentanil as a sedative agent in critically-ill adult patients. The authors' conclusions reflected the evidence presented. Given a number of review weaknesses (small sample sizes, potential for publication bias, and poor quality of included trials), the reliability of the conclusions is uncertain. 
Recent studies of patient outcomes in the United States have shown mixed conclusions regarding the effect of for-profit ownership on treatment quality. To test whether outcome quality differs across ownership types for patients being treated for end stage renal disease, a cross-sectional study was performed using data from 180,913 end stage renal disease patients receiving center based hemodialysis in 1996. Results indicated that patients in for-profit renal dialysis facilities had slightly higher mortality during the study period than patients in not-for-profit facilities, after controlling for patient case mix and market type. For profit ownership seems to affect not only treatment inputs, according to previous research, but also patient outcomes, as indicated by the results here.

Hospital conversions to for-profit ownership have prompted concern about continuing access to care for the poor or uninsured. This DataWatch presents an analysis of the rate of uncompensated care provided by Florida hospitals before and after converting to for-profit ownership. Uncompensated care declined greatly in the converting public hospitals, which had a significant commitment to uncompensated care before conversion. Among converting nonprofit hospitals, uncompensated care levels were low before conversion and did not change following conversion. The study suggests that policymakers should assess the risk entailed in a conversion by considering the hospital's historic mission and its current role in the community.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of gemcitabine for the treatment of unresectable or advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The authors concluded that gemcitabine should be offered as treatment for advanced or unresectable pancreatic cancer. Given the poor reporting of the review process and uncertain quality of the primary studies, the authors' conclusions should be viewed with some caution.
To probe into the affect of different postures on blood pressure and pulses of patients with cesarean section , 60 cases were randomly divided into 3 groups. Each group had 20 patients and they were in supine , left oblique , and right oblique position. Both blood pressure and pulses of the patients were observed before and 5 min, 10 min, 15 min after anesthesia respectively. Results showed that 15 min after anesthesia , both in supine and right oblique position groups , there were statistical differences between before and after anesthesia in terms of their blood pressure changes (P < 0.05) . In terms of pulse changes of the patients , there were no statistical differences between before and after anesthesia (P > 0.05) . Suggested that for cesarean section patients it is good to use left oblique position to relieve the pressure of enlarged womb on inferior vena cava. It is also a simple and easy way to prevent low blood pressure syndrome from happening for patients underwent cesarean section.
OBJECTIVES: This study evaluated the biological and subjective consequences observed in individual smokers after implementation of a workplace smoking-restriction policy.
METHODS: Employees were evaluated for 4 weeks before and 4 weeks after their workplace became smoke-free (n = 34). A comparison group of smokers whose work-site smoking was unrestricted served as controls (n = 33). Daily exposure to tobacco constituents and withdrawal effects were measured.
RESULTS: Smokers at the restricted site had verified smoking reduction (mean = four cigarettes per day) and significantly reduced nicotine and carbon monoxide during the work shift. There were increases in ratings of some common withdrawal symptoms (cravings/urges, concentration difficulties, increased eating, depression). No evidence of compensatory smoking during nonwork hours was found. Overall tobacco exposure, as measured in saliva cotinine, showed a nonsignificant 15% decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Workplace smoking restriction markedly altered smoking patterns (i.e., reduced daytime smoking) and reduced cotinine levels to an amount consistent with cigarette reduction. Thus, work-site smoking restriction may promote meaningful, albeit limited, reductions in tobacco exposure and consequent health risks.

INTRODUCTION: Nutritional Risk Screening-2002 (NRS-2002) has been recently used to evaluate the nutritional status of patients according to the recommendation of ESPEN. In this prospective study, we aimed to find the effectiveness of NRS-2002 on preoperative patients who were candidates for elective procedure at a general surgery clinic.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The NRS-2002 scores of 698 patients were recorded in first 24 hours subsequent to their admission to hospital. The patients who had NRS-2002 score of 3 or 4 were accepted, and the scores were correlated with their age and clinical diagnosis.
RESULTS: The nutritional status was good in 655 (93.9%) patients, and 43 patients (6.1%) were malnourished. A total of 135 patients had malignant disorders, among them 37 had concomitant malnutrition. The rate of malnutrition was 28.1% in patients with malignancy. The latter rate was 1.1% in patients with benign disorders. In patients who had gastrointestinal malignancy, the malnutrition rate was 31% (35/89), and the latter ratio was 6.5% (3/46) in patients who had malignancies arising from other than the gastrointestinal system. The NRS-2002 score was changed significantly according to age and malignancies (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: NRS-2002 can be easily used to evaluate the nutritional status of patients. This system is significant in deciding on nutritional support (Tab. 2, Ref. 12). Full Text (Free, PDF) www.bmj.sk.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the retention of the double "J" tube in the value of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) for ureteral stones. METHOD: 76 cases of patients with ureteral stones ESWL before surgery were randomly divided into pairs of "J" pipe treatment group and control group to observe the relatively ESWL efficacy. RESULTS: double "J" pipe treatment group ESWL the number (P <0.05), mean expulsion time (P <0.01) significantly reduced and stones a crush rate increased significantly (P <0.05). The two groups were significant differences. CONCLUSION: In the ESWL treatment of ureteric stones, indwelling double "J" tube is more effective than ordinary gravel.
In a short term qualitative study exploring the impact that improvements to housing might have upon the health of household members, respondents perceived significant benefits of housing improvements for physical and mental health, and for both children and adults. There is a need for prospective research which monitors health and wellbeing before, during, and after housing improvement and which uses independent measures of health.

In postmenopausal patients, stress and urge incontinence often occur as a consequence of oestrogen deficiency. We performed a comparative study in a prospectively randomised and placebo controlled group of women with urge incontinence to investigate different dosages of intravaginally applied oestriol. Clinical and urodynamic parameters were also compared. 15 women (Group I) received 1 mg oestriol applied daily intravaginally over 3 weeks; 15 women (Group II) received a daily dosage of 3 mg and 10 women received a placebo. A complete clinical and urodynamic evaluation was carried out twice at a 4-week interval. The women receiving a daily dose of 3 mg oestriol applied intravaginally demonstrated a significant improvement of the parameters strong desire to void, pollakisuria, and nycturia. No improvement was seen in patients with motoric urge incontinence.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors of this review found that there was little reproducible evidence to support the efficacy of subacromial corticosteroid injections in the management of rotator cuff disease. These conclusions appear appropriate given the evidence presented, though there remains the possibility that some relevant evidence might not have been identified.
We report the results of a prospective randomised controlled trial of the management of 101 Colles' fractures in patients over the age of 55 years. Within two weeks of initial reduction 43 fractures had displaced with either more than 10 degrees dorsal angulation or more than 5 mm radial shortening. These patients were randomly divided into two groups: 21 were remanipulated and held by an external fixator; in the control group of 22 patients, the redisplacement was accepted and conservative treatment was continued. Patients treated with external fixation had a good anatomical result, but their function was no better than that of the control group. We found no correlation between final anatomical and functional outcome, and concluded that the severity of the original soft-tissue injury and its complications are the major determinants of functional end result.

Hyperlipidemia is a common complication of PBC. Ten patients with serologically and histologically defined PBC were randomized to receive either oral cyclosporin A (CyA) or placebo for one year. Fasting blood samples were obtained from subjects at the beginning, and following one year of treatment, for plasma lipids, apolipoproteins AI (apo AI) and B (apo B), and lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) activity. On entry to the study there were no significant differences between groups for serum concentrations of total cholesterol (TC), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), free cholesterol (FC), total phospholipids (TPL), apo AI, apo B and LCAT activity. Compared to normal laboratory values, baseline TC was elevated in 5/10, LDL-C in 5/10, TPL in 6/10, while LCAT activity was decreased in 8/10 patients. The percent change after one year for CyA group vs the placebo group are as follows: total cholesterol, -22 vs -8%; LDL cholesterol -33 vs -25%; free cholesterol, -39 vs -14%; total phospholipids, -46 vs -23%; and LCAT activity, +/- 236 vs +/- 43%. The decrease in TC, LDL-C, FC, TPL with increase in LCAT activity suggests that CyA administration is associated with improvement in the lipid abnormalities of PBC.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that eight active treatments showed evidence of an improvement in pain over placebo in patients with fibromyalgia. Indirect comparison of active treatments found no strong differences. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution in view of the risk of publication bias and the small number of included studies for each comparison.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the primary prophylaxis, and treatment of venous and arterial thrombosis, with low molecular weight heparins was safe and effective in children aged 18 years and under. The unknown quality of the included studies and methodological flaws means the authors conclusions may not be reliable and are not entirely consistent with the results.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate if the variations of heart magnetic resonance imaging in beta-thalassemia major patients treated with Deferoxamine B mesylate (DF) or Deferiprone (L1) chelation therapy is a useful tool of the indirect myocardial iron content determination. For this reason, a prospective study was carried out. Seventy-two consecutive patients with beta-thalassemia major (35 treated with DF and 37 with L1) were studied. The main outcome results were laboratory parameters including determination of the liver iron concentration (LIC) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart and liver. The heart to muscle signal intensity ratios (HSIRs) were significantly increased in both the DF (t = -2.8; p < 0.01) and L1 (t = -3.1; p < 0.01) groups after one year of treatment No statistically significant difference in the values of HSIRs was present between the two groups at the beginning of treatment (p = 0.25; t = 1.13), and after one year of treatment (p = 0.20; t = 1.28). The HSIR were inversely correlated to the LIC (r = -0.52; p < 0.001) but not with ferritin levels (r = 0.10; p = 0.18). A positive correlation was found between the variation of HSIRs and that of the liver signal intensity ratios (r=0.52; p < 0.001), and a mild correlation (r = 0.40; p < 0.001) was found between the gamma glutamyltransferase (gammaGt) levels and the HSIRs values. Our data confirm that heart MRI is sensitive enough to detect significant variations of the mean HSIR during iron chelation with DF or L1.

A 15-session sex education program was delivered by teachers to 586 10th graders using techniques based on social learning theory, including modeling, in-class and out-of-class practice of skills for abstaining from sexual intercourse, and for contraception. Knowledge about reproduction and birth control, intentions to use skills to avoid pregnancy, and communication with parents about pregnancy prevention were significantly greater at posttest and 6-month follow-up for the trained group than for the control group. Members of the trained group tended to use birth control more often, especially those who started to have sexual intercourse subsequent to the program. No differences in the frequency of sexual intercourse, pregnancy scares, or pregnancies were found. Satisfaction with the program was high. Although skill training by itself may not be sufficient to significantly prevent pregnancies, this program offers promise of being a useful component of combined school, home, and community activities to prevent pregnancy.

To evaluate the efficacy of pyrimethamine on the blood stage (suppressive prophylaxis) and liver stage (causal prophylaxis) of Plasmodium falciparum in pregnant women, in vivo and in vitro field studies were conducted in Ilorin, Nigeria, from Jan 1 to June 30, 1988. For pregnant women with P falciparum infections who received 25 mg of pyrimethamine weekly for suppressive prophylaxis, 67% (59/88) of in vivo and 60% (6/10) of in vitro tests showed pyrimethamine resistance. A second group of parasitaemic and parasite-free pregnant women was enrolled to evaluate the efficacy of pyrimethamine as a primary tissue schizonticide; after receiving a curative dose of chloroquine (25 mg/kg), half the women were given 25 mg of pyrimethamine weekly and half received no prophylaxis. Parasitologic failure rates did not differ between the pyrimethamine-treated (8/34) and the control (11/37) groups during the 16-week follow-up. Thus, pyrimethamine is not effective for suppressive or causal prophylaxis in pregnant women in Ilorin.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of psychological interventions for the treatment of adults with obsessive-compulsive disorder, and found that exposure with response prevention and cognitive restructuring were effective in reducing symptoms. The authors' conclusions appear to reflect the evidence, but consideration should be given to the low level of study quality and the potential for bias in the review.
OBJECTIVE: The authors examined the effect of the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor donepezil on magnetic resonance markers of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease.
METHOD: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study, 67 patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease received 24 weeks of treatment with donepezil (5 mg/day for the first 28 days and 10 mg/day thereafter) or placebo. Patients were reevaluated at 6-week intervals to measure change from baseline in several outcome measures, including right, left, and total hippocampal volumes, measured with magnetic resonance imaging; brain concentrations of N-acetylaspartate, measured with proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy; and cognition, assessed with the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive subscale.
RESULTS: At some interim assessments, mean normalized measures of N-acetylaspartate concentration tended to be higher in the donepezil-treated patients than in the patients who received placebo, but these differences were not significant at endpoint. At endpoint, the donepezil-treated patients had significantly smaller mean decreases in total and right hippocampal volumes and a smaller, nearly significant mean decrease in left hippocampal volume, compared with the placebo-treated patients. Mean Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive subscale scores were improved after treatment with donepezil, relative to placebo, at weeks 6, 12, 18, and 24.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that donepezil may have a potentially protective effect in Alzheimer's disease. Larger, longer-term confirmatory studies of the medication's effects are warranted.

In this randomized, open-label, 8-week comparative study, the efficacy and safety of venlafaxine and fluoxetine were assessed in outpatients with major depression. One hundred forty-five patients were assigned to receive venlafaxine 37.5 mg twice daily or fluoxetine 20 mg once daily. On day 15, if clinically indicated to improve patient response, the dosage could be increased at the investigator's discretion to venlafaxine 75 mg twice daily or fluoxetine 40 mg once daily. One hundred forty-five patients were evaluated for safety and 110, for efficacy. The mean age was 37 years, and 70% of the patients were female. In both treatment groups, mean scores on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale decreased significantly between baseline (27.8, venlafaxine; 29.2, fluoxetine) and the end of the study (8.7, venlafaxine; 8.2, fluoxetine). Similarly, mean scores on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale decreased significantly between baseline (31.4, venlafaxine; 31.6, fluoxetine) and the end of the study (8.3, venlafaxine; 7.6, fluoxetine). In venlafaxine patients, the most common adverse events were nausea (44.3%), headache (40.0%), insomnia (31.4%), dizziness (30.0%), and dry mouth (22.9%); in fluoxetine patients, they were headache (32.0%), nausea (28.0%), insomnia (24.0%), anxiety (21.3%), sleepiness (20.0%), and generalized tremor (20.0%). The results of this study indicate that venlafaxine is effective and well tolerated for the treatment of major depression at doses of 37.5 or 75 mg twice daily and not significantly different from fluoxetine 20 or 40 mg once daily.

Using data from a larger 12-week clinical trial, the authors evaluated the comparative efficacy and safety of sertraline (n=42) and fluoxetine (n=33) in patients over age 70 with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Similar improvement on measures of depression, including remission of depressive symptoms, was evident, although significantly more sertraline-treated patients achieved a criterion clinical response. Significantly greater improvement for the sertraline group was apparent on the Digit Symbol Substitution Test, but not on two other measures of cognitive functioning. Although there was no difference in the rate of adverse events experienced, fluoxetine-treated patients lost significantly more body weight over the 12-week trial than did sertraline-treated patients, whereas the latter group exhibited significantly more "shaking. "

BACKGROUND: Depression is treated by a great variety of antidepressant treatments. SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) are well known: it is, however, sure that further progress is needed and the search for antidepressants with other mechanisms of action (such as tianeptine) or different efficacy is still of interest.
METHODS: A multinational study compared tianeptine with fluoxetine in 387 patients with Depressive Episode, or Recurrent Depressive Disorder, or Bipolar Affective Disorder (ICD-10), in a double-blind parallel group design. They were treated for six weeks.
RESULTS: At inclusion, no significant difference between groups was shown. Final MADRS scores were 15.7 and 15.8 with tianeptine and fluoxetine, respectively (ITT population) (p = 0.944). MADRS responders were 58% and 56% with tianeptine and fluoxetine, respectively (p = 0.710). No statistical difference was observed for the other efficacy parameters. Thirty-six withdrawals occurred in each group, without any difference for the reasons of discontinuation. There was no major difference between groups for the other safety parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, both tianeptine and fluoxetine exhibited a good efficacy and safety.

The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerability of reboxetine, a uniquely selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor, with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine. A double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, multicentre design was employed. One hundred and sixty-eight patients with acute major depressive episodes were randomized to receive oral reboxetine (8-10 mg/day) or oral fluoxetine (20-40 mg/day). The treatment period was 8 weeks. Reboxetine and fluoxetine were similarly effective as assessed by the mean reduction in total Hamilton Depression Rating Scale score, the percentage of responders and patients in remission, Clinical Global Impression severity of illness and global improvement scores and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale. A sub-analysis of patients with severe depression indicated that reboxetine had superior efficacy compared with fluoxetine. Both treatments resulted in some improvement in Social Adaptation Self-evaluation Scale total scores and this was more evident for those patients treated with reboxetine who achieved remission. Both treatments were well tolerated. The results indicate that reboxetine is an effective and well tolerated antidepressant, being more effective than fluoxetine in patients with severe depression, and more effective in terms of social functioning in those patients who achieved remission.

OBJECTIVE: The atypical subtype of depression appears to be both well validated and common. Although monoamine oxidase inhibitors are effective in treating atypical depression, their side effects and prescription-associated dietary restrictions reduce their suitability as a first-line treatment. The objective of this study was to estimate the efficacy of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine in the treatment of major depression with atypical features.
METHOD: One hundred fifty-four subjects with DSM-IV major depression who met the Columbia criteria for atypical depression were randomly assigned to receive fluoxetine, imipramine, or placebo for a 10-week clinical trial. Imipramine was included because its known efficacy for treatment of atypical depression helped to calibrate the appropriateness of the study group.
RESULTS: In both intention-to-treat and completer groups, the effectiveness of both fluoxetine and imipramine was significantly better than that of placebo. The two medications did not differ from each other in effectiveness. Significantly more patients dropped out of treatment with imipramine than with fluoxetine. Before treatment, patients on average rated themselves as very impaired on psychological dimensions of general health and moderately impaired on physical dimensions, compared with population norms. The self-ratings of patients who responded to treatment essentially normalized on these measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite earlier data that SSRIs might be the treatment of choice, fluoxetine appeared to be no better than imipramine in the treatment of atypical depression, although fluoxetine was better tolerated than imipramine.

BACKGROUND: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the efficacy and safety of once-daily venlafaxine extended release (XR) and fluoxetine in outpatients with major depression and concomitant anxiety.
METHOD: Patients who met DSM-IV criteria for major depressive disorder and satisfied eligibility criteria were randomly assigned to once-daily venlafaxine XR, fluoxetine, or placebo for 12 weeks. Efficacy was assessed with the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A), and Clinical Global Impressions scale.
RESULTS: Among 359 outpatients, venlafaxine XR and fluoxetine were significantly superior (p < .05) to placebo on the HAM-D total score beginning at week 2 and continuing to the end of the study. Venlafaxine XR but not fluoxetine was significantly better than placebo at week 2 on the HAM-D depressed mood item. At week 12, the HAM-D response rate was 43% on placebo, 67% on venlafaxine XR, and 62% on fluoxetine (p < .05). The HAM-D remission rate was significantly higher (p < .05) at weeks 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and final evaluation with venlafaxine XR and at weeks 8, 12, and final evaluation with fluoxetine than with placebo. The HAM-A response rate was significantly higher (p < .05) with venlafaxine XR than with fluoxetine at week 12. The incidence of discontinuation for adverse events was 5% with placebo, 10% with venlafaxine XR, and 7% with fluoxetine.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily venlafaxine XR is effective and well tolerated for the treatment of major depression and concomitant anxiety and provides evidence for superiority over fluoxetine.

Spastic thumb deformity is the result of imbalance between intrinsic and extrinsic forces acting across unstable joints. This paper presents a classification of spastic thumb deformity based on the accurate assessment of the deforming forces, outlines methods for their correction and reviews the results of our surgery. Thumb reconstruction procedures were performed in 32 patients with 33 spastic thumb deformities. All patients were assessed pre- and postoperatively using the same functional assessment system which was performed by the same team. The thumb was maintained out of the palm in 29 patients and lateral pinch was established in 26 patients.

The authors investigated the pharmacological treatment of delusional depression by assigning patients on a random double-blind basis to amitriptyline alone, perphenazine alone, or a combination of the two. Fourteen (78%) of the 18 patients assigned to amitriptyline plus perphenazine were responders, compared with seven (41%) of 17 patients treated with amitriptyline alone and three (19%) of the 16 patients treated with perphenazine alone. The combination of amitriptyline and perphenazine was clearly superior (p less than .01).

Despite the demonstrated efficacy of cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) for social anxiety disorder (SAD), many individuals do not respond to treatment or demonstrate residual symptoms and impairment posttreatment. Preliminary evidence indicates that acceptance-based approaches (e.g., acceptance and commitment therapy; ACT) can be helpful for a variety of disorders and emphasize exposure-based strategies and processes. Nineteen individuals diagnosed with SAD participated in a 12-week program integrating exposure therapy and ACT. Results revealed no changes across a 4-week baseline control period. From pretreatment to follow-up, significant improvements occurred in social anxiety symptoms and quality of life, yielding large effect size gains. Significant changes also were found in ACT-consistent process measures, and earlier changes in experiential avoidance predicted later changes in symptom severity. Results suggest the acceptability and potential efficacy of ACT for SAD and highlight the need for future research examining both the efficacy and mechanisms of change of acceptance-based programs for SAD.

A double-blind experiment was performed to test the possible prophylactic effect of the antifibrinolytically active propylic ester of p-hydroxybenzoic acid (PEPH) on alveolitis sicca dolorosa (dry socket). Tablets containing PEPH or placebo were inserted at random selection into the alveoli of forty-five consecutive patients, each of whom had had an impacted mandibular third molar removed. The prophylactic effect of PEPH in this study was found to be highly significant as compared to that of placebo, and no patients in the experimental group developed alveolitis sicca dolorosa.

Heterotopic ossification after hip arthroplasty can be prevented by ibuprofen given 3 months postoperatively. To evaluate the effectiveness of 10 days of ibuprofen treatment we performed a randomized, double-blind, prospective study on 57 patients with primary arthrosis, undergoing total hip arthroplasty. 47 patients completed the study and no effect on the incidence of ossification could be detected.

Monitoring of anti-Xa activity (aXa) levels is not routinely required in patients receiving enoxaparine at prophylactic dosages, since aXa is supposed to stay below the manufacturer's recommended range in patients treated for venous thrombosis (0.5-1 IU/ml). In order to aXa in elderly subjects receiving prophylactic enoxaparin, 68 consecutive patients (mean age 82.5 +/- 10.7 years) hospitalized in a medical department receiving 4000 IU enoxaparin daily subcutaneously for the prevention of venous thromboembolic disease were studied. After the first injection of enoxaparin, the aXa of 57.4% patients was superior to 0.5 IU/ml while 69.4% had an aXa higher than 0.5 after 8.4 +/- 1.2 days. A negative relationship between aXa and body weight and a trend towards a positive correlation between aXa and age but not with creatinine clearance were noted. Our findings question the opportunity to monitor aXa in elderly patients receiving 4000 IU enoxaparin as antithrombotic prophylaxis.

BACKGROUND: Low molecular weight heparin is administered in a fixed, weight-adjusted dose without laboratory monitoring in the majority of patients. However, there is still uncertainty regarding optimum dosing in patients with renal impairment. AIM: To examine the association between peak anti-Xa levels and creatinine clearance in patients treated with enoxaparin. METHOD: Prospective study of hospitalised patients receiving enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily. Peak anti-Xa levels were measured after patients received at least 3 doses of SC enoxaparin and were compared in 3 patient groups according to baseline creatinine clearance (Group 1: Crcl < or = 30 mL/min; Group 2: Crcl > 30 and < or = 60 mL/min; Group 3: Crcl > 60 mL/min). RESULTS: 50 patients were studied (54% male). Peak anti-Xa levels after a mean of 5.2 doses of enoxaparin were within or above the recommended therapeutic range (0.6-1.0 unit per mL) in 96% of patients (48/50). At this time, five of the seven patients (71.4%) in Group 1 had peak anti- Xa levels > 1.0 unit per mL, compared with 15/19 (78.9%) in Group 2 and 7/24 (29.2%) in Group 3. Mean peak anti-Xa levels were 1.58 +/- 0.54 unit per mL, 1.25 +/- 0.38 unit per mL and 0.93 +/- 0.28 unit per mL in Groups 1, 2 and 3 respectively, p=0.001. CONCLUSION: Patients with reduced creatinine clearance who were receiving enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily achieved significantly higher peak anti-Xa levels compared with those with normal creatinine clearance. Dose reduction and/or routine laboratory monitoring of enoxaparin should be considered in patients with impaired renal function.
The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Depression Guideline Panel recommended pharmacotherapy as the 1st-line treatment for more severely depressed primary care patients, but research supporting its recommendation has not been conducted with this population. A post hoc analysis was conducted, therefore, with data gathered in a randomized controlled trial about the relationship between initial level of depressive severity and functional ability, treatment with nortriptyline hydrochloride (NT) or interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), and clinical course over 8 months among primary care patients experiencing major depression. Treatment type was unrelated to clinical course among more severely depressed patients (baseline 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HRSD] score > or = 20). However, less severely depressed patients (baseline 17-item HRSD score < or = 19) who were prescribed NT improved significantly more rapidly during the initial 3 months of treatment than patients provided with IPT.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of haloperidol as an anti-emetic. The authors concluded that single doses of 1 to 2 mg parenteral haloperidol are effective in preventing post-operative nausea and vomiting, as well as nausea and vomiting due to gastrointestinal diseases, and have few side-effects. Given the limited quality of many of the included studies, a more cautious conclusion might have been more appropriate.
Focused rigidity casting was compared with standard casting in a randomised prospective study. Two hundred consecutive patients attending a fracture clinic were assigned to have either a standard cast consisting of synthetic or plaster of paris, or a focused rigidity cast of synthetic material. Patients were assessed using a specially developed scoring system termed the Bradford Plaster Index. In patients with fractures of the base of fifth metatarsal, focused rigidity casting proved superior to traditional techniques for ability score (p=0.0001), satisfaction score (p=0.0023), overall impairment of function (p=0.019), limitation of movement following cast removal (p=0.024) and in limitation of muscle strength following cast removal (p=0.001). In fractures of the distal radius, focused rigidity casting was superior for ability score (p=0.0002) and satisfaction score (p=0.00009). Patients with scaphoid fractures were better for satisfaction score (p=0.0483). Compared with the standard technique, focused rigidity casting has been shown to be superior to traditional methods with regard to satisfaction and functional scores without any detriment to clinical results.

In all, 85 per cent of Colles' fractures are clinically satisfactory after 10 years. Clinical results improve little after 3 months. Displaced intraarticular fracture, wrist deformity and algodystrophy are associated with an unsatisfactory outcome.

CRD SUMMARY: This review looked at rate control versus rhythm control for atrial fibrillation. The authors found that rate control was associated with a lower incidence of hospitalisation, but there were little other differences in outcomes. They concluded that rate control was preferable. There were a number of problems with the review and the conclusion may not, therefore, be reliable.
We conducted a 10-center, double-blind trial to compare the efficacy and toxicity of four antiepileptic drugs in the treatment of partial and secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizures in 622 adults. Patients were randomly assigned to treatment with carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, or primidone and were followed for two years or until the drug failed to control seizures or caused unacceptable side effects. Overall treatment success was highest with carbamazepine or phenytoin, intermediate with phenobarbital, and lowest with primidone (P less than 0.002). Differences in failure rates of the drugs were explained primarily by the fact that primidone caused more intolerable acute toxic effects, such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and sedation. Decreased libido and impotence were more common in patients given primidone. Phenytoin caused more dysmorphic effects and hypersensitivity. Control of tonic-clonic seizures did not differ significantly with the various drugs. Carbamazepine provided complete control of partial seizures more often than primidone or phenobarbital (P less than 0.03). Overall, carbamazepine and phenytoin are recommended drugs of first choice for single-drug therapy of adults with partial or generalized tonic-clonic seizures or with both.

Previous studies have shown conflicting findings in linking polymorphic variation in folate-related genes to the risk of neural tube defect pregnancy. Recent evidence points to maternal genotype being important in determining NTD risk. A case-control study was undertaken in 97 mothers of NTD cases from the northern region of the UK. Pregnant controls (n = 190) from a regional DNA bank and non-pregnant controls (n = 100) from the same geographical area were recruited. MTHFR 677C >T, MTHFR 1298A >C, MTRR 66A >G, SHMT 1420C >T, CbetaS 844ins68, and RFC-1 80G >A allele and genotype frequencies were determined and odds ratios (OR) calculated. Erythrocyte folate levels for cases and controls were also measured and a comparison made of median erythrocyte folate levels stratified according to genotype. The MTHFR 677C >T variant was not shown to be an independent NTD risk factor in mothers of NTD-affected pregnancy. A second polymorphism in MTHFR, 1298A >C, was less frequently observed in mothers of NTD cases (OR [95% CI]=0.57 [0.33, 0.97]). Possession of compound 1298A >C and 677C >T variants elevated risk of NTD pregnancy considerably (TT/AC+TT/CC vs CC/AA OR [95% CI]=6.56 [1.10, 39.33]). Erythrocyte folate levels were persistently lower in NTD mothers (p = 0.001) despite assays being conducted many years after the index pregnancy (17.6+/-12.6 years). Erythrocyte folate levels were depressed in the presence of the MTHFR 677C >T variant.

A controlled randomised trial has been carried out to ascertain if there are tangible benefits from using a tourniquet when avulsing varicose veins during routine varicose vein surgery. Twenty-six patients have been studied. Twenty limbs were operated on with a tourniquet and 20 limbs without a tourniquet. The mean weight of varices excised was 2.76 g (range 0.51-8.79 g) with a tourniquet and 2.68 g (0.77-11.27 g) without a tourniquet (NS, Wilcoxon's rank sum test). Mean blood loss was 16 ml (0-136 ml) with a tourniquet and 107 ml (16-581 ml) without a tourniquet (P less than 0.01, Wilcoxon's rank sum test). The mean time to complete avulsions was 38 min with a tourniquet and 35 min without a tourniquet (NS, Student's t test). The tangible benefits of a tourniquet are limited to the saving of blood which can amount to 500 ml per leg. Losses could amount to 1 litre in bilateral cases operated upon without tourniquet. The method is simple, provides a clean operating field and should be more widely used.

Treatment with streptokinase or heparin was allocated randomly to 20 patients with major pulmonary embolism verified by angiography. In addition, 4 patients treated with streptokinase and 1 patient treated with heparin were included in the trial prior to the start of treatment. Streptokinase of heparin was given for 72 hours and pulmonary angiography was repeated. The angiographic evidence of thrombolysis was significantly greater (p less than 0.01) in the 14 patients treated with streptokinase than in the 11 treated with heparin. In the heparin group, 1 patient died from massive embolism 15 hours after the start of treatment. In another patient who died 4 weeks later from cerebral glibolastoma, persistent massive embolism contributed to the fatal outcome. In the streptokinase group, 1 patient with a metastatic pulmonary carcinoma died 3 weeks after the start of treatment from gangrene of both legs following thrombotic occlusion of the inferior vena cava. Bleeding was more common after treatment with streptokinase than with heparin, but was not a serious problem in any patient. It is concluded that patients with life-threatening pulmonary embolism should be offered the benefits of streptokinase.
Treatment with streptokinase followed by heparin was compared on a randomized basis with treatment with heparin alone in patients with acute pulmonary embolism. The diagnosis and results of treatment were established by pulmonary angiography. Fifteen patients received streptokinase and 16 received heparin alone. Complications included bleeding and pyrexia in both treatment groups and anaphylaxis in a patient receiving streptokinase. There were three deaths attributed to the disease its treatment. Patients in the strepto kinase group had significantly greater angiographic improvement (P = 0.0125) than those in the heparin group.
The role of corticosteroids in the prevention of post-extubation laryngeal oedema was evaluated in a randomized study of 276 patients under mechanical ventilation. Fifty per cent of the patients received methylprednisolone 40 mg intramuscularly and intravenously. The nasotracheal tubes used had a large volume, low-pressure balloon. Laryngeal oedema, confirmed by laryngoscopy, occurred in six patients (2%), 4 of whom were in the corticosteroid-treated group, and required immediate reintubation in 4 cases. Thus, the incidence of laryngeal oedema was not modified by corticosteroids. Regular prescription of corticosteroids does not seem to be useful before extubation of patients intubated with large volume, low-pressure balloon tubes.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of the 1977 and 1995 tobacco sales bans on tobacco acquisition of minors.
DESIGN: Biennial nationwide postal surveys (adolescent health and lifestyle survey, AHLS) in 1977-2003; annual classroom surveys (school health promotion survey, SHPS) in 1996-2003.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Entire Finland-12, 14, 16, and 18 year olds (AHLS, n = 80 282); eighth and ninth graders (14-16 year olds) (SHPS, n = 226 681).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Purchase of tobacco from commercial sources during the past month, purchase from different commercial (shop, kiosk, other outlet) and social sources, ease of buying tobacco, overall acquisition of tobacco products, daily smoking, tobacco experimenting.
RESULTS: Decrease in tobacco purchase from commercial sources was small and short term after 1977 but large and permanent after 1995: purchase rate among 14 year old smokers diminished from 90% to 67% in 2003, 16 year olds from 94% to 62%. Purchases in shops decreased most (14 year olds: from 39% to 14%; 16 year olds: from 76% to 27%); purchases in kiosks less. An increase was observed in obtaining tobacco from other outlets and friends (social sources). Only 2-3% of 14-16 year old smokers used commercial sources exclusively when obtaining tobacco. Daily smoking began to decrease after 2001, following an earlier decrease in those experimenting. No changes were observed among age groups not targeted by the ban.
CONCLUSIONS: Legislation appears to have permanently changed tobacco sales practices and decreased purchases from commercial sources. Social sources need to be taken into account when controlling access to tobacco. Sales bans should be accompanied by other health promotion measures.

BACKGROUND: More than 700 communities have en acted laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco to minors, but little is known about the impact of such laws on youth smoking behavior. The objective of this study was to determine whether local tobacco sales laws de crease the rate of progression to established smoking among adolescents.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective cohort study of 592 Massachusetts youths who did not smoke and were ages 12-15 years at the time of a baseline, random-digit-dial, telephone survey in 1993 and who were reinterviewed in 1997.
RESULTS: Youths living in towns with a local tobacco sales ordinance at baseline were significantly less likely to progress to established smoking (defined as having smoked at least 100 cigarettes in one's life) than youths living in a town without an ordinance (odds ratio = 0.60; 95% confidence interval 0. 37, 0.97). The magnitude of this effect was unchanged after control ling for potential confounding variables. However, there was no relationship between living in a town with an ordinance and youths' perceived access to tobacco.
CONCLUSIONS: Local tobacco sales laws are associated with reduced rates of adolescent smoking initiation, but in this setting, this effect did not appear to be mediated through reduced access to cigarettes.

In a multicenter, randomized, double-blind study, we compared the effects of nebulized (5 mg x 2) and intravenous (0.5 mg) albuterol (salbutamol) over 1 h in 47 patients admitted to hospital with severe acute asthma defined as a peak expiratory flow (PEF) below 150 L/min and hypercapnia (Pa(CO2) > or = 40 mm Hg). Additional treatment included nasal oxygen and hydrocortisone succinate. The efficacy was assessed after 1 h. In the group treated by nebulization (NEB group, n = 22) 19 (86%) patients (95% confidence interval: 65 to 97%) had been treated successfully according to predefined criteria, versus 12 (48%) patients (95% confidence interval: 28 to 69%) in the intravenously treated group (i.v. group, n = 25), p = 0.006. The mean increase in PEF was greater in the NEB group than in the i.v. group (+107 +/- 94 L/min versus +42 +/- 66 L/min, p = 0.01) as well as the decrease in Pa(CO2) values (-10 +/- 5 mm Hg versus -2 +/- 12 mm Hg, p < 0.01). Beta agonist-induced hypokalemia was more pronounced in the i.v. group than in the NEB group. We conclude that, in hypercapnic acute asthma, the nebulized route has a greater efficacy and fewer side effects than the intravenous route.

We set out to determine the factors that predict the outcome of conventional radical radiotherapy for inoperable non-small cell lung cancer. A retrospective casenote review was carried out of all 69 patients treated between 1986 and 1992 at the Northern Ireland Centre for Clinical Oncology, Belfast, with radical radiotherapy for inoperable non-small cell lung cancer. The tumour dose ranged from 45 Gy to 67.5 Gy, delivered in 15-30 fractions, 5 days per week over 3-6 weeks. All patients were followed up for 5 years. The disease was TNM Stage T1-T4N0-N2M0. The majority of tumours (51) were squamous. Overall survival was 63.8% (44-patients; 95% confidence interval (CT) 51.3-75.2) at one year; median survival was 16 months and 5-year survival was 13% (nine patients; 95% CI 6.1-23.3). Five-year survival for the 36 patients with stage T1 or T2 disease was 5.6% (2 patients). Five-year survival for the 33 patients with stage T3 or T4 disease, all with tumours at or near the carina, was 21.2% (seven patients). A WHO performance status of 0 or 1 (P = 0.03, Cox proportional hazards model) was associated with a better chance of survival.

Operative therapy is beneficial in patients with bowel obstruction after operation for colorectal carcinoma. The cause of the bowel obstruction is more likely to be benign following colorectal carcinoma than following other malignancies. Also, the period of preoperative nasogastric suction can safely be extended to 3 to 4 days in these patients, since a resolution rate of 28 percent can be achieved with minimal risk of strangulation.

The authors conducted a national survey to investigate the current status of psychiatric training in primary care/internal medicine residencies. Fifty-four residency training directors completed and returned the survey. The survey results show that an average of 99 hours (69.5 hours clinical plus 29.8 hours didactics) is devoted to psychiatric training during the 3 years of primary care/internal medicine residency training. Responding residency training directors indicated that psychiatric training is important (an average of 7 out of 10 on a 10-point rating scale), and 63% of respondents indicated that more training in psychiatry is needed.

AIM: To evaluate the role of prophylactic antibiotics in the management of acute necrotizing pancreatitis. METHODS: A computerized literature search of Medline, PubMed, Spring, Ovid, Elsevier, Embase, CNKI, and VIP databases was conducted to identify relevant articles published from January 1994 to October 2011. According to the inclusion criteria, 5 studies were selected. The data were analyzed using RevMan 5.1 software. RESULTS: Our meta-analysis suggests that prophylactic antibiotic treatment did not significantly reduce morbility (RR = 0.75, 95%CI 0.43-1.28, P = 0.29) or the incidence of infected pancreatic necrosis (RR = 0.81, 95%CI 0.55-1.19, P = 0.29), nonpancreatic infection (RR = 0.79, 95%CI 0.59-1.06, P = 0.12), or surgical intervention (RR = 0.78, 95%CI 0.45-1.36, P = 0.37). CONCLUSION: Prophylactic antibiotic treatment does not reduce the occurrence of infected pancreatic necrosis, nonpancreatic infection, surgical intervention or morbility in patients with acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
We report the evaluation of a pharmacist-led medication education program for the elderly. The program consisted of a single group-based education session followed by individual pre-discharge counseling. Patients also received an individual medication record card. The study design was a nonrandomised trial. Patients in the control group received a "dummy" intervention conducted on alternate months to the medication program. Drug compliance was assessed by interviewer-administered questionnaire in the patients' homes at 1 and 3 months post-discharge. The main outcome factor of interest was severe noncompliance with essential medications. This meant taking 80% or less or conversely 120% or more of those medications prescribed for the control of the patient's medical condition. At 1 and 3 months post-discharge, no effect of the program was detected. However, among the sub-group of patients taking four drugs or more the effect of the program was evident at 3 months post-discharge. Among this group at 3 months post-discharge, 55% of control group patients were severely noncompliant with essential medications as compared to 32% of the education group (a difference of 23%, 95% confidence interval 4-42%). This effect was not accounted for by possible confounding factors such as age, sex, number of medications and the patient's living arrangements.

We tested whether computer-based decision support (CBDS) could enhance the ability of primary care physicians (PCPs) to manage chronic pain. Structured summaries were generated for 50 chronic pain patients referred by PCPs to a pain clinic. A pain specialist used a decision support system to determine appropriate pain therapy and sent letters to the referring physicians outlining these recommendations. Separately, five board-certified PCPs used a CBDS system to "treat" the 50 cases. A successful outcome was defined as one in which new or adjusted therapies recommended by the software were acceptable to the PCPs (i.e., they would have prescribed it to the patient in actual practice). Two pain specialists reviewed the PCPs' outcomes and assigned medical appropriateness scores (0 = totally inappropriate to 10 = totally appropriate). One year later, the hospital database provided information on how the actual patients' pain was managed and the number of patients re-referred by their PCP to the pain clinic. On the basis of CBDS recommendations, the PCP subjects "prescribed" additional pain therapy in 213 of 250 evaluations (85%), with a medical appropriateness score of 5.5 +/- 0.1. Only 25% of these chronic pain patients were subsequently re-referred to the pain clinic within 1 yr. The use of a CBDS system may improve the ability of PCPs to manage chronic pain and may also facilitate screening of consults to optimize specialist utilization.

BACKGROUND: Community based cardiac rehabilitation programs have been shown to reduce cardiovascular disease related mortality and morbidity.
METHODS: An observational study of 954 cardiac patients admitted to Royal Perth Hospital (Western Australia) with a cardiac event and registered in the HeartBeattrade mark cardiac rehabilitation program between October 2000 and December 2005. The primary end point was nonelective readmission for a cardiac condition within 12 months.
RESULTS: Patients who attended the cardiac rehabilitation program were readmitted less often and spent less time in hospital. The program had a positive effect on women and men equally across a wide range of age groups.
DISCUSSION: Community based cardiac rehabilitation programs are integral to the management of cardiac patients.

PURPOSE: To critically examine the literature about strategies and factors that influence lifestyle change in people with diabetes mellitus.
METHOD: This integrative literature review included an extensive search of published literature about strategies to facilitate lifestyle change related to diabetes mellitus. Articles reviewed were empirical studies focused on lifestyle change and were published between 1985 and 1999. Meta-analyses and relevant reviews of the literature were also included. Over 90 article were initially identified, 72 met the specified criteria and could be categorized according to a theoretical framework or a broad topic area.
FINDINGS: Studies were clustered into the categories of educational, behavioral, cultural, and health beliefs that influence or are barriers to lifestyle change. Studies indicate that positive outcomes are associated with diabetes education programs that focus on self-management, emphasize behavioral strategies, and provide culturally relevant information.
CONCLUSIONS: Theoretically grounded research in diabetes care is imperative for the future. Expansion of research methods, continued methodological rigor of studies, and instrument development would contribute to knowledge development in diabetes care. Research priorities are proposed.

The immediate postpartum insertion of standard intrauterine devices (IUDs) and those specially modified for postpartum use was evaluated in a multicenter clinical trial. The immediate postpartum insertion of IUDs was not associated with any increased risk of perforation or infection, although expulsion rates were higher than with interval insertions. The expulsion rate varied widely between centers using similar devices, suggesting that training in insertion is essential. Postpartum IUD insertions can be a practical contraceptive option for patients and providers of medical services.
Venous thromboembolism remains an important cause of maternal mortality. For women at risk during pregnancy, the recommended venous thromboembolismprophylaxis is unfractionated heparin. Low molecular weight heparins, such as dalteparin, also may be suitable, but randomised trials have not been performed. Pregnant women (105) with confirmed previous or current thromboembolism were randomised to receive either unfractionated heparin twice daily (mean 20569 IU/day) or dalteparin once daily (mean 4631 IU anti-factor Xa units/day) subcutaneously for thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and postpartum period. Recurrence of venous thromboembolism and safety of treatments were assessed. Dalteparin administered once daily was safe and effective in thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and postpartum.
Postpartum superficial and deep venous thrombosis were found in 22.3% and 5.3% of women with varicose veins who delivered vaginally, or by cesarean section. The preventive use of low doses of heparin (5,000 U every 12 h injected subcutaneously) in 116 parturients with varicose veins reduced significantly the incidence of postpartum venous thrombosis. None of the 26 women with previous thrombosis who received preventive treatment, developed such an event.
This study investigated the effectiveness of a "hands-on" foot care teaching/learning approach for adults with diabetes. By random assignment, the control group received a lecture presentation on foot care, while the experimental group participated in a hands-on session on foot care in addition to the lecture presentation. Data concerning the subjects' foot care knowledge and skills, the condition of their feet, and their level of HbA1c were gathered prior to and six months after the foot care educational sessions. No significant increases in knowledge about foot care were observed in the experimental group. The experimental group reported improvements in inspecting and washing their feet on a daily basis, and in care of the toenails. No significant differences were observed in the status of the subjects' feet. The HbA1c readings were significantly improved for both the experimental (t = 4.10, df = 10, p = 0.002) and control (t = 2.25, df = 9, p = 0.051) groups. A hands-on educational session may improve foot care practices temporarily. However, long term effects need to be studied to discern overall improvement of foot care practices and physical status of the feet.
In a prospective, randomized trial 6 mm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and 6 mm human umbilical vein (HUV) were compared in above-knee femoropopliteal bypass grafting. In claudicants a prosthetic graft was used intentionally, in limb-salvage cases only when autologous vein was insufficient. Ninety-six extremities were randomized (49 PTFE and 47 HUV). Operative indication was disabling claudication in 77 and limb salvage in 19 extremities. The two groups were comparable as to preoperative risk factors and operative and postoperative treatment. Median follow-up was 76 months (range 47 to 91 months), during which 23 patients died of nonrelated causes with functioning grafts. Thirty-eight grafts failed (33 because of occlusion and five for other reasons). At 6 years the primary patency rate was 38.7% in the PTFE group and 71.4% in the HUV group (p < 0.001). Corresponding rates for secondary patency at 6 years were 51.4% and 76.4% (p < 0.005).
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) (Gore-Tex) and human umbilical vein (Biograft) arterial grafts were compared for below-knee femoropopliteal bypass grafting in a prospective randomized clinical trial. One hundred five patients (105 limbs) entered the trial. Seventy-six percent suffered from rest pain, ulceration, or gangrene. The median postoperative ankle-arm blood pressure index was 0.36. Twenty-three limbs had three patent tibial arteries, 46 limbs had two tibial arteries, 31 limbs had one patent artery, and five limbs had isolated popliteal segments. Thirty-four percent were repeat operations. Fifty-five patients were allocated to receive PTFE grafts and 50 to receive human umbilical vein grafts. The two groups were comparable as to preoperative risk factors and operative and postoperative treatment. During the first 4 years (maximum 1609 days) 40 PTFE grafts and 24 umbilical veins occluded. At 1 year the PTFE patency rate was 53% and at 4 years was 22%. For umbilical vein the corresponding figures were 74% and 42% (p = 0.005, Gehan test). During follow-up the incidence of PTFE failure was on the average 2.1 times higher than that of umbilical vein failure (95% confidence limits 1.2 to 3.4).
Language recovery in aphasic patients who received one of three types of speech and language treatment was compared with that in aphasic patients who received no treatment. One hundred aphasic patients were followed from 2 to 4 weeks postonset for 1 year or until recovery, using a standardized test battery administered at systematic intervals. Both treatment methods provided by trained speech-language pathologists were efficacious, while the method provided by trained nonprofessionals approached statistical significance. Small group size prevented resolution of the question of whether one type of treatment was superior to another.
To compare the efficacy of the combination therapy Methotrexate (MTX) and Chloroquine (CHLO) with MTX and Placebo (PLA) in the treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis. A total of 82 patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), diagnosed according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria, received orally either MTX 7.5 mg/week and CHLO 250 mg/day or MTX 7.5 mg/week and PLA 1 tablet/day. Adverse effects (AE) were monitored monthly and disease activity was assessed at 0, 2, 4 and 6 months. Sixty-eight patients completed the study. All outcome measures improved significantly in both treatment groups. Patients receiving MTX/CHLO ended the study with a significantly lower joint count, greater grip strength and better functional ability the patients in the MTX/PLA group, respectively; 4.5 vs 7.5 (P < 0.05), 113.3 vs 89.1 (P < 0.05) and 0.636 vs 0.811 (P < 0.05). Mild AE were more frequently observed in the MTX/CHLO, 17 events in 15 patients, compared to 9 events in 8 patients in the MTX/PLA group (NS). These data indicate that MTX/CHLO is slightly more efficacious and toxic than is MTX/PLA in the treatment of RA.
A single-dose, randomized, double-blind, parallel-treatment study was performed in 200 outpatients with acute pain caused by the surgical removal of impacted third molars. Meclofenamate 100 mg plus codeine 60 mg, meclofenamate 50 mg plus codeine 30 mg, meclofenamate 100 mg, codeine 60 mg, and placebo treatment groups were compared for sum of pain intensity differences, peak pain intensity difference, sum of pain relief scores, peak pain relief, number of observations at which pain was half relieved, overall evaluation of effectiveness, and time to remedication with a backup analgesic. Meclofenamate 100 mg plus codeine 60 mg was significantly more effective (P less than .005) than codeine 60 mg for all variables except number of observations at which pain was half relieved. Both meclofenamate-codeine combinations and meclofenamate 100 mg alone were significantly more effective (P less than .005) than placebo for all variables. Eleven adverse experiences were reported in 7 patients (3.5%); the most common was somnolence in 1 patient receiving meclofenamate 100 mg plus codeine 60 mg, in 2 treated with meclofenamate 50 mg plus codeine 30 mg, and in 1 treated with codeine 60 mg.
A double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study compared the analgesic efficacy of a single oral dose of 500 mg diflunisal, 60 mg codeine, 500 mg diflunisal plus 60 mg codeine given as separate agents, and placebo in 161 patients with moderate to severe postoperative pain. Standard subjective measures were used to evaluate analgesia. Eight-hour sum of pain intensity differences and total pain relief scores for all active treatments were significantly better than were those for placebo (p less than 0.05). Diflunisal plus codeine performed the best followed by diflunisal, codeine, and placebo. Diflunisal plus codeine was better than placebo from 1 1/2 to 8 hours (p less than 0.01), better than codeine from 1 1/2 to 6 hours (p less than 0.05), and better than diflunisal alone from 1/2 to 1 1/2 hours (p less than 0.05) for most measures of analgesia. Factorial analysis demonstrated a significant early codeine effect and a significant diflunisal effect throughout. No significant treatment group differences were observed regarding adverse effects. Our data demonstrate that diflunisal plus codeine is generally well tolerated and provides analgesia superior to that of diflunisal or codeine alone in the treatment of moderate to severe postoperative pain.
In a double-blind, randomized, single-dose trial the analgesic contribution of acetaminophen, 1000 mg, and codeine, 60 mg, was determined. The study was a 2 X 2 factorial experiment in which 120 patients suffering from pain as a result of oral surgery rated their pain intensity and pain relief for up to 5 hours after a single dose of one of: 1000 mg acetaminophen, 60 mg codeine, 1000 mg acetaminophen plus 60 mg codeine, or placebo. The factorial analysis showed that both 1000 mg acetaminophen and 60 mg codeine made a statistically significant (P less than 0.05) contribution to the analgesic effectiveness of the combination on all measures of efficacy (sum of pain intensity differences, largest pain intensity difference, total pain relief, largest pain relief, and time to remedication). The incidence of adverse effects did not appear to differ among the treatments, including placebo.
Meclofenamate sodium, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent, was compared at two dose levels (100 mg and 200 mg) with codeine (60 mg) and placebo in a double-blind, randomized study of 218 women after normal vaginal delivery. The purpose was to determine the analgesic efficacy and safety of meclofenamate sodium for the short-term treatment of acute episiotomy pain. Meclofenamate sodium was significantly better than placebo in most measures of pain relief and reduction of pain intensity. The 100-mg dose of meclofenamate sodium was significantly better than codeine in relieving pain. Adverse experiences with the study medications were minimal (6.4%). Patients receiving codeine reported more side effects than did those receiving either dose of meclofenamate sodium. Meclofenamate sodium is a safe, effective analgesic for acute episiotomy pain.
Meclofenamate sodium was compared, double-blind, with codeine and placebo for the treatment of acute episiotomy pain. One hundred sixty-eight women with moderate or severe episiotomy pain after normal delivery were assigned randomly to one of four treatment groups: one received meclofenamate sodium 200 mg at dose 1 and 100 mg at doses 2 and 3; one received meclofenamate sodium 100 mg at dose 1 and 50 mg at doses 2 and 3; one received codeine 60 mg at all three doses; and one received placebo at all three doses. Efficacy measurements were evaluated periodically for 6 hours after medication. After the first administration, both doses of meclofenamate sodium were significantly superior to placebo and to codeine from 2-6 hours in pain intensity difference and pain relief. For second and third doses, data were available for too few patients to allow valid analysis and interpretation. Adverse effects occurred in 4 patients in each meclofenamate sodium group, and in 8 in the codeine group and in 6 in the placebo group. The study indicates that single 100- and 200-mg doses of meclofenamate sodium are as safe as, and significantly more effective than, codeine 60 mg or placebo for episiotomy pain.
The efficacy and safety of ciramadol (Cir) as an analgesic in relieving moderate to severe pain after oral surgery has been studied in 79 patients randomly assigned to receive single oral doses of Cir 15, 30 or 60 mg, codeine 60 mg or placebo. During the 6-hour observation period, the three ciramadol-treated groups indicated greater pain relief than the codeine 60 mg or placebo groups. In general, Cir 60 mg was significantly more effective than codeine 60 mg, and all doses of Cir were superior to placebo. The proportion of patients in each Cir group reporting adverse experiences was significantly higher than in either the placebo or codeine groups. The experimental system proved very effective in demonstrating analgesic potency of Cir. The very high incidence of side-effects in the three ciramadol-treated groups makes it unfit for further clinical use in ambulant patients.
144 patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis from six centres were randomised to receive oral cyclosporin or placebo for 6 months. The initial daily dose of cyclosporin was 2.5 mg/kg, which was increased cautiously with monitoring of serum cyclosporin levels and creatinine; the mean stabilisation dose was 3.8 mg/kg. There were significant improvements in the cyclosporin-treated patients compared with the controls in the major outcomes of reduction of active joints (23% improvement), pain (24%), and functional status (16%); global improvement was 27%. In the cyclosporin group serum creatinine increased by a mean of 15.6 mumols/l and mean arterial blood pressure by 6.27 mmHg; these increases were controlled in all but 2 patients by dose adjustment without withdrawal from the study.
Controlled double-blind studies have demonstrated the efficacy of 14 mg/kg per day cyclosporin A (CsA) in patients with severe psoriasis. Recently a placebo-controlled double-blind randomized study confirmed that CsA therapy (mean dose 5.5 mg/kg/day improves psoriasis significantly. We have carried out a placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial involving 12 patients suffering from severe psoriasis resistant to local therapy. Within 4 weeks, 5 mg/kg per day CsA resulted in 6 patients in a mean reduction of 72.5% of the PASI score, which differed significantly from the mean reduction of 18.1% in 6 patients receiving placebo. The most important side-effect was reversible hypertension in 1 patient. The preliminary results of a dose-finding study that started recently indicate that 1-3 mg/kg per day CsA results in a significant improvement in the patient's condition.
In order to study the incidence of antenatal identification and postnatal diagnosis of small for gestational age (SGA) infants, 4997 women with optimal menstrual history were randomised. One group had the gestational age estimated from last menstrual period (LMP), the other from ultrasonographically measured biparietal diameter (BPD) in the second trimester. Both the incidence of antenatally suspected and postnatally diagnosed SGA infants were reduced by approximately 30% in the BPD-dated group. It is concluded that this was due to the shift in gestational age estimation.
This study was undertaken to assess the effect of CO2 laser vaporization, 5-fluorouracil 5% (5-FU) topical application and Interferon alpha-2a (IFA alpha-2a) in the treatment of C.A. or F.C. of the male genital tract. From March 1986 to September 1991, 1372 men, sexual partners of women with F.C. or C.A. or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, were submitted to peoscopy. One thousand and nineteen (74.27%) men presented with various penile lesions caused by HPV (histologically confirmed); of these 505 were treated for C.A. or F.C. or a combination of F.C. and C.A. The best treatment modalities, irrespective of the kind of lesion, were found to be the combination of 5-FU plus IFN alpha-2a (high dose) (98.27%), the combination of CO2 laser vaporization plus 5-FU plus IFN alpha-2a (high dose) (93.93%) and the combination of CO2 laser vaporization plus 5-FU (87.23%). In conclusion we believe that IFN alpha-2a can be used with excellent results as first line treatment in combination with CO2 laser vaporization or/plus 5-FU in patients with C.A. or F.C. or combined condylomata.
Previously we demonstrated a 68 per cent recurrence rate for subclinical penile human papillomavirus infections found by magnified penile surface scanning and treated with the carbon dioxide laser. In this report it is shown that the addition of a regimen of adjuvant topical 5-fluorouracil does not lower the recurrence rate. This knowledge combined with the evidence for a subclinical urethral reservoir of human papillomavirus implies that any strictly topical therapy will fail at 4 months of followup and that improved systemic therapy may be needed.
30 males and 29 females with condyloma acuminatum took part in a double-blind randomized trial with 0,5% 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) salicylic acid containing varnish for warts versus the varnish without 5-FU. The females were treated twice weekly at the clinic, the males were treated once daily at home by themselves. The 5-FU solution was found significantly superior to placebo (P less than 0,01). 60% of the 5-FU treated patients were healed with a median healing time of two weeks in the males and three weeks in the females. In the placebo group 27,6% healed with a median healing time of 2,5 weeks (males) an 3,5 weeks (females). Blood tests obtained before and after the trial were normal. Patch tests with 0,5% 5-FU revealed no sensitization after the therapy.
Efficacy and acceptability of tianeptine were investigated in a multicenter, randomized, double blind, and sertraline-controlled study. As a total, 212 in- or outpatients with DSM IV major depression single episode, recurrent and bipolar depression, were treated for 42 days either with tianeptine (37.5 mg) or with sertraline (50 mg). At inclusion, sociodemographic, physical and psychological parameters showed no significant intergroup differences. MADRS responders (50% reduction of baseline score) were 66% and 67% with tianeptine and sertraline, respectively. No statistical interdrug differences were observed either in the number of withdrawals or in the efficacy and acceptability parameters.
This study compared the efficacy and tolerability of 150 mg/day imipramine and 50 mg/day sertraline for the treatment of a major depressive episode (DSM-IV) in older adults (N = 55) in an 8-week, randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trial. Intention-to-treat analysis (last observation carried forwards) showed a reduction of 50% or more on the baseline scores of the Montgomery-Asberg Rating Scale (MADRS) in 60.7% and 55.6% of patients receiving imipramine and sertraline, respectively (p = .698). Full remission of symptoms (MADRS < 9) was observed in 50.0% and 51.8% of patients, respectively (p = .891). Side effects were more frequent among patients treated with imipramine (86.7%) than among patients treated with sertraline (42.1%) (p = .008). Dropout rates were high in both groups (46.4% and 29.6% respectively, p =.200). These results indicate that imipramine and sertraline are equally effective for the treatment of major depression in later life, although adverse reactions are more frequent among subjects treated with imipramine than with sertraline.
Community health workers (CHWs) are promoted as a mechanism to increase community involvement in health promotion efforts, despite little consensus about the role and its effectiveness. This article reviews the databased literature on CHW effectiveness, which indicates preliminary support for CHWs in increasing access to care, particularly in underserved populations. There are a smaller number of studies documenting outcomes in the areas of increased health knowledge, improved health status outcomes, and behavioral changes, with inconclusive results. Although CHWs show some promise as an intervention, the role can be doomed by overly high expectations, lack of a clear focus, and lack of documentation. Further research is required with an emphasis on stronger study design, documentation of CHW activities, and carefully defined target populations.

It has been known for some time that the compliance with antidepressants in general practice is sub-optimal, but no new studies have been carried out since the 1970s, since which time training in general practice has improved and new classes of antidepressants have been introduced. In this study 46 patients commenced on an antidepressant for clinical reasons by their GP were interviewed 10-12 weeks later by a research worker. Thirty two percent of patients stopped medication within 6 weeks and 63% of these did not inform their GP of their decision. Side-effect burden was significantly associated with non-compliance. Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors showed a slight but non-significant compliance advantage in this small study but all patients treated with SSRIs were initially prescribed a dose for which there is evidence of superiority of effect over placebo, while only 30% of those on tricyclics were prescribed such a dose. Further work to establish accurate methods of determining compliance and effective ways of enhancing compliance with antidepressants in general practice is required.

To address whether St John's wort is useful for the treatment of depression we attempted to retrieve all English-language articles with data on the efficacy, safety, and availability of St John's wort. Randomized, controlled, double-blind trials were selected and assessed for methodological quality using a standardized checklist, and data on pharmacology, cost, regulation, and safety were extracted. Eight studies were identified, found to be of generally good methodological quality, and determined to provide a modest amount of data to suggest that St John's wort is more effective than placebo in the treatment of mild to moderate depression. The absolute increased response rate with the use of St John's wort ranged from 23% to 55% higher than with placebo, but ranged from 6% to 18% lower compared with tricyclic antidepressants. More data are required to assess both its use in severe depression and its efficacy compared with other antidepressants. Rates of side effects were low. As a dietary supplement, St John's wort is currently largely unregulated, but the Food and Drug Administration is reviewing plans to tighten its regulatory oversight.

The management of post-operative pain has been an area of concern for many years, with many studies focusing on the knowledge and beliefs of nurses working in this area. Following the report of the Royal College of Surgeons & College of Anaesthetists (1990) in the UK, there has been a rapid expansion in the development of Acute Pain Services (APS) in an attempt to counter these concerns. This descriptive study considers the possible impact the introduction of an APS had on the knowledge and beliefs of nurses working in the surgical area. A closed-answer questionnaire was used to replicate an earlier study (Mackintosh, 1994) which took place before the introduction of the APS. Findings demonstrate a consistent but mainly statistically non-significant trend in all areas towards an improved knowledge base and more appropriate beliefs about pain.

The short-term effects of an accessible exercise intervention on the strength and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) among older adult women were evaluated. We conducted an 8-week resistance training intervention utilizing elastic bands in 62 community-dwelling women with a mean age of 68 years. Participants were randomly assigned to either an exercise or a control group. Pre- and postintervention assessments included strength tests and HRQOL. Results revealed significant increases in three major muscles compared to the control group. However, there were no significant changes on either mental or physical health functioning. The elastic bands provide older adult women with an inexpensive, practical exercise program that effectively increases strength within 8 weeks but may have little effect on self-reported HRQOL.

OBJECTIVE: The present study sought to determine whether the 12-session pre- to posttest therapeutic gains that had been found by Deblinger, Lippmann. and Steer (1996) for an initial sample of 100 sexually abused children suffering posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms would be sustained 2 years after treatment.
METHOD: These sexually abused children, along with their nonoffending mothers, had been randomly assigned to one of three cognitive-behavioral treatment conditions, child only, mother only, or mother and child, or a community comparison condition, and were followed for 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years after treatment.
RESULTS: A series of repeated MANCOVAs, controlling for the pre-test scores, indicated that for the three measures of psychopathology that had significantly decreased in the original study (i.e., externalizing behavior problems, depression, and PTSD symptoms), these measures at 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years were comparable to the posttest scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the pre- to post-treatment improvements held across the 2-year follow-up period. The clinical and research implications of these findings are discussed.

Successful sexual functioning is a complex process involving psychological and social responses as well as neurological, biochemical and vascular processes. Today it is believed that more than 50% of the sexual dysfunction cases have an organic etiology. Reflecting the controversy over the management of psychogenic impotence, there are several different methods which are currently in clinical use. In this prospective study we aimed to evaluate the curative effects of acupuncture therapy in men with purely psychogenic impotence. Of the 29 patients treated with this procedure 20 patients demonstrated successful erections following a varying number of acupuncture sessions. In the light of our findings we may conclude that acupuncture may be an effective alternative in the management of purely psychogenic impotence.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the one-leg standing test could be used to predict frailty in community-dwelling elderly people. Some interventions to improve balance, resistance and strength/endurance seemed to improve one-leg standing times. Given a lack of reporting of the review process, potential for missed studies and the paucity of good-quality evidence, the result should be interpreted with caution.
We performed a meta-analysis of all studies comparing off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery (OPCABG) and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for patients with coronary artery disease. Ten studies were included in the meta-analysis and 4,821 patients were compared, of whom 3,450 patients underwent PCI and 1,371 patients underwent OPCABG. The rates of stroke, myocardial infarction, cardiac mortality, and all-cause mortality were similar. The 12-month rate of major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular events and need for repeat revascularization was significantly lower in the OPCABG group when compared with the PCI group.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the use of tiotropium was beneficial in treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Previous evidence in favour of the superiority of tiotropium over long-acting beta-agonists was also supported. As the results may not be generalisable and potential bias was possible, these conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed pain relief from acupuncture and other conscious sedation methods used in assisted reproduction therapy. The author concluded that no method was found to be superior for pain relief during oocyte removal, and clinical pregnancy rates appeared similar between interventions. Limitations in the search and study selection process may have introduced bias into the review.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that interventions were associated with improvements in indices of happiness in most, but not all, participants with severe/profound intellectual and multiple disabilities, but further research is required. Inadequate reporting of review methods and a reliance upon potentially-biased small observational studies mean that the authors' conclusions about the effects of the interventions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review concluded that the use of stenting following uncomplicated ureteroscopy is associated with higher morbidity. However, the considerable diversity and poor reporting of the included studies mean that the role of stenting in the management of patients after uncomplicated ureteroscopy remains unclear. These suitably cautious conclusions are supported by the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated the benefits and harms of late versus early cord clamping in term infants. The authors concluded that delayed clamping is beneficial to the newborn and benefits extend into infancy, although polycythaemia increases. Overall, this was a well-conducted review and the conclusions appear reliable.
Seventy-four patients with acute pulpitis, apical periodontitis, marginal periodontitis, or pulpoperiodontitis were examined. A series of symptoms and signs was registered. Diagnostic specificities and sensitivities were calculated, and thirteen variables were subjected to discriminant analysis and log-linear multiway contingency table analysis. Pulpoperiodonitis was found inseparable from pulpitis on the basis of the registered symptoms and signs. Several symptoms and signs previously believed to have differential diagnostic power were found insignificant. The following combination of symptoms and signs yielded a correct diagnosis in 82.1% of the cases: constant pain, tenderness to temperature changes, "the tooth feels extruded," impaired mouth opening, tenderness to palpation in apical area, and mobility.

In a prospective randomized blind study of 182 patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty, the patients per- and postoperative need for analgesics was assessed in two groups, one receiving general anesthesia and a 3-in-one block, the other group only general anesthesia. Although we found a significant reduction in analgesics per- and postoperatively in the 3-in-one block group, the difference in analgesics was small and has no clinical relevance in the patient with a healthy cardiovascular status. We conclude that 3-in-one block in combination with light general anesthesia is not the anesthetic of choice in total hip arthroplasty using the posterior approach.

The authors evaluated whether glatiramer acetate (GA) modifies the severity of tissue damage in 1,722 new lesions from 239 patients with MS enrolled in a placebo-controlled trial monitored with monthly cerebral MRI. The percentage of new lesions that evolved into "black holes" was lower in GA-treated than in placebo patients on scans at 7 (18.9 and 26.3%; p = 0.04) and 8 (15.6 and 31.4%; p = 0.002) months after lesion appearance. GA has a favorable effect on tissue disruption in MS lesions once they are formed.
Fifty patients underwent a variety of hand operations and were randomized for wound closure either with tissue adhesive (Indermil) or sutures. The two treatment groups had similar demographic characteristics and similar outcomes at the 2 and 6 week postoperative assessments which were performed by a designated tissue viability nurse blinded to the method of closure. Five minor wound dehiscences occurred: three in the adhesive group and two in the suture group. No infection occurred in either group. In conclusion, the study demonstrates tissue adhesive is as effective as suture in this type of hand surgery.
We randomly assigned 33 patients with left hemisphere stroke, limb apraxia, and aphasia to an apraxia or a control (aphasia) treatment group. Before and after each treatment, patients underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological testing battery and a caregiver evaluation of patient's activities of daily life (ADL) independence. Apraxia severity was related with ADL independence. Control (aphasia) treatment improved patients' language and intelligence performance. Apraxia treatment specifically improved praxic function and ADL.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that statin treatment might time-dependently increase left ventricular ejection fraction and may reduce left ventricular end-diastolic diameter, left-ventricular end-systolic diameter, B-type natriuretic peptide and New York Heart Association functional class in patients with chronic heart failure. Given the low quality of included studies and the presence of statistical heterogeneity, the authors' conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that heparin prophylaxis had little or no net benefit and mechanical prophylaxis provided no benefit and resulted in harm to patients with stroke. The authors' conclusions should be interpreted with some caution due to the acknowledged publication bias and the pooling of clinically heterogeneous and poor-quality studies.
We conducted a trial of oral acetazolamide for the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis in 22 Thai adults with headache and an opening cerebrospinal fluid pressure of >/=200 mm H(2)0. The trial was terminated prematurely because patients who received acetazolamide developed significantly lower venous bicarbonate levels and higher chloride levels and had more-frequent serious adverse events than did subjects who received placebo.
510 of 1009 pregnant women in the Trondheim area (Norway) were randomly selected for ultrasound examination at the 19th and 32nd weeks of pregnancy in addition to routine antenatal care. Among the screened women, twins were diagnosed earlier and there were slightly fewer post-term inductions (2.8% versus 4.0%) and fewer low-weight births (2.2% versus 3.6% less than 2500 g), but none of these differences was statistically significant. There were no differences in the condition of the newborn. Small-for-gestational-age births were more often diagnosed antenatally in the screened group and the mothers received more active treatment. During pregnancy, screened women were admitted to hospital more often than unscreened women (15.5% versus 9.2%). The study revealed no adverse short-term biological effects from ultrasound. The cost of the screening programme, including associated costs such as extra hospital admissions, was about US$ 250 per pregnancy.
The efficacy and tolerability of moclobemide and sertraline were compared in a 13 week trial on 55 depressive patients. Patients were diagnosed according to DSM-III-R criteria using SCID (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R). The study group was composed of 48 patients with major depression and 7 with minor depression. Patients were randomized in two drug groups and raters were blind to the drugs patients used. HDRS and CGI were used to assess the change in depressive symptoms. Twenty seven patients received moclobemide and 28 patients received sertraline. The dose of moclobemide used was 300-600 mg/day and that of sertraline was 50-200 mg/day. At the end of 13 weeks mean drop in HDRS for the overall group was 14.78 and the response rate calculated as percentage of patients showing a 50% drop in HDRS score was 77.8. The response rate was 76.5% for moclobemide and 78.5% for sertraline. The difference was not significant. The side effects were assessed by using UKU Side Effects Rating Scale. The most three observed side effects were dry mouth, headache and insomnia.
OBJECTIVES: This study assessed progress in achieving clean indoor air in California. METHODS: Data were from large, cross-sectional population-based surveys (1990-1999). RESULTS: Indoor workers reporting smoke-free workplaces increased from 35.0% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 33.7, 36.3) in 1990 to 93.4% (95% CI = 92.6, 94.2) in 1999. Exposure of nonsmoking indoor workers to secondhand tobacco smoke decreased from 29.0% (95% CI = 27.2, 30.8) to 15.6% (95% CI = 14.1, 17.1). Adults with smoke-free homes increased from 37.6 % (95% CI = 35.1, 40.1) in 1992 to 73.7% (95% CI = 73.2, 74.2) in 1999; nearly half of smokers in 1999 had smoke-free homes. In 1999, 82.2% (95% CI = 81.5, 82.9) of children and adolescents (0-17 years) had smoke-free homes, up from 38.0% (95% CI = 35.1, 40.9) in 1992. CONCLUSIONS: California's advances highlight an important opportunity for tobacco control.
The phase III trial EXPRESS was a randomised, double-blind comparison of two anticoagulant therapies used as prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism (VTE) during major elective orthopaedic surgery. The investigational treatment was ximelagatran/melagatran (Exanta), a new direct thrombin inhibitor in both its oral and subcutaneously injectable forms; the comparator was the low molecular weight heparin enoxaparin. Results showed ximelagatran/melagatran was highly statistically significantly superior to enoxaparin in preventing VTE with a relative risk reduction in proximal deep vein thrombosis plus pulmonary embolism of 63.3% (p < 0.000002). The relative risk reduction for total VTE was 23.6% (p < 0.0003). There were no differences in clinically important bleeding events (fatal bleeding, critical organ bleeding and bleeding requiring reoperation) but excess bleeding assessed subjectively was more common in the ximelagatran group than in the enoxaparin group.
After total hip (THR) or knee replacement (TKR), there is still an appreciable risk of developing deep-vein thrombosis despite prophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). In a prospective, randomised study we examined the efficacy of LMWH in combination with intermittent pneumatic compression in patients undergoing primary unilateral THR or TKR. We administered 40 mg of enoxaparin daily to 131 patients combined with either the use of intermittent pneumatic compression or the wearing of graduated compression stockings. Compression ultrasonography showed no evidence of thrombosis after LMWH and intermittent pneumatic compression. In the group with LMWH and compression stockings the prevalence of thrombosis was 28.6% (40% after TKR, 14% after THR). This difference was significant (p < 0.0001). In the early post-operative phase after THR and TKR, combined prophylaxis with LMWH and intermittent pneumatic compression is more effective than LMWH used with graduated compression stockings.
Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli are reported to occur in up to 66% of the patients undergoing a major urological operation. Thromboembolic stockings, external sequential pneumatic compression stockings and anticoagulant agents, such as heparin sodium plus dihydroergotamine mesylate, have been suggested to decrease the risk of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli. A total of 74 evaluable patients undergoing a major urological operation was randomized to receive either thromboembolic stockings, external sequential pneumatic compression stockings, or heparin plus dihydroergotamine as prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli. 111Indium-labeled platelet scans, performed preoperatively and on days 1, 3 and 6 postoperatively, were used to diagnose deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli. Mean patient age was 63 years and all but 1 operation was performed for neoplastic disease. Deep venous thrombosis was detected in 5 of 25 patients (20%) with thromboembolic stockings, 3 of 24 (12.5%) with external sequential pneumatic compression stockings and 2 of 25 (8%) with heparin plus dihydroergotamine. There was no difference in blood loss or complications among the groups. Although statistical significance among the treatment groups was not reached in this study, the trend to a decrease in deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli with external sequential pneumatic compression stockings and heparin plus dihydroergotamine, and an absence of an increase in morbidity in these groups supports the use of these modalities to decrease the morbidity and mortality of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary emboli.
A randomized, prospective clinical trial of 70 patients undergoing craniotomy was performed to compare and evaluate two forms of mechanical prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis. Thirty-eight patients received antiembolism stockings, whereas 32 patients received external pneumatic compression. Prophylaxis was begun preoperatively and continued intraoperatively and post-operatively until the patients were ambulatory. Impedance plethysmography was used to detect deep vein thrombosis both preoperatively and postoperatively. Two patients, one from each group, developed thromboembolic complications postoperatively. Impedance plethysmography showed false-positive findings in two additional patients. There were no deaths. The data suggest that either form of mechanical prophylaxis is effective against the development of deep vein thrombosis in this high-risk patient population.
Worldwide statistics reveal that 25 to 40 per cent of patients who are over the age of 40 years and operated on for 1 or more hours will develop a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). The studies reviewed in this paper were performed to evaluate several modalities and compare their effectiveness in preventing DVT in postoperative patients. In the first study, five modalities plus a control group were evaluated in 562 patients from five surgical specialties. The incidence of DVT in the control group was 35 per cent. Though most of the pharmacologic agents were effective in reducing the incidence of DVT, the antistasis devices (gradient elastic stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression) were most effective. The purpose of the second study was to evaluate the effectiveness of combining a pharmacologic drug with an antistasis modality. Deep venous thrombosis was virtually eliminated in this group of 328 patients. There was only a 1.5 per cent incidence of DVT in the treated population as compared to a 26.8 per cent incidence in the control group. Thus, it seems that combining one antistasis and one pharmacologic agent greatly reduces the incidence of lower extremity thrombi. I-125 fibrinogen scanning was the most sensitive test in detecting DVT and had an accuracy of 97 per cent.
A research protocol to evaluate the prevention of deep vein thrombosis in sequential patients undergoing prostatectomy is presented. There is an overall incidence of deep vein thrombosis in 8 per cent of patients. There was no advantage with intermittent leg compression when compared with elastic stockings.
A prospective study was undertaken in order to test the efficacy of intermittent calf compression for prevention of thromboembolism in patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty. The patients were studied pre- and postoperatively by routine Doppler ultrasound examinations in addition to clinical assessment. Statistically significant evidence substantiates the view that intermittent calf compression decreased the incidence of thr thromboembolic problem.
Routine prophylaxis for venous thromboembolic disease after total hip replacement (THR) is recommended. Pneumatic compression with foot pumps seems to provide an alternative to chemical agents. However, the overall number of patients investigated in randomised clinical trials has been too small to draw evidence-based conclusions. This randomised clinical trial was carried out to compare the effectiveness and safety of mechanical versus chemical prophylaxis of DVT in patients after THR. Inclusion criteria were osteoarthritis of the hip and age less than 80 years. Exclusion criteria included a history of thromboembolic disease, heart disease, and bleeding diatheses. There were 216 consecutive patients considered for inclusion in the trial who were randomised either for management with the A-V Impulse System foot pump. We excluded 16 patients who did not tolerate continuous use of the foot pump or with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Patients were monitored for DVT using serial duplex sonography at 3, 10 and 45 days after surgery. DVT was detected in three of 100 patients in the foot-pump group and with six of 100 patients in the LMWH group (p < 0.05). The mean post-operative drainage was 259 ml in the foot-pump group and 328 ml in the LMWH group (p < 0.05). Patients in the foot-pump group had less swelling of the thigh (10 mm compared with 15 mm; p < 0.05). One patient developed heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. This study confirms the effectiveness and safety of mechanical prophylaxis of DVT in THR. Some patients cannot tolerate the foot pump.
BACKGROUND: We evaluated in a randomized controlled study the possibility to use foot pump mechanical compression compared to routine LMWH as prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis during knee arthroplasty. METHODS: Forty patients were included in this preliminary report. Eleven patients withdrew, usually during the early phase of the study. RESULTS: Among the 29 patients completing a venography, 27% in the compression group and none in the LMWH group had a DVT. This difference was statistically significant (p<0.05). One further patient in the compression group died from pulmonary embolism 17 days postoperatively. CONCLUSIONS: With the present study protocol, mechanical foot pump compression failed to be as efficient as LMWH prophylaxis.
We performed a randomised controlled study to compare heparin with the A-V Impulse System in the prevention of deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) in 132 consecutive patients undergoing total hip replacement. After the operation, all patients had compression stockings, 65 were treated with calcium heparin and 67 with the intermittent plantar pump. DVT was diagnosed by Doppler ultrasound and thermography, followed by phlebography. There were 23 cases of DVT (35.4%) in the heparin group, with 16 major and seven minor thromboses. In the impulse pump group there were nine cases (13.4%) with three major and six minor thromboses. The differences for all thromboses and for major thromboses were both significant at p < 0.005. In the heparin group there was one fatal pulmonary embolism and nine patients (13.8%) had excessive bleeding or wound haematomas, as against none in the impulse pump group.
In an open controlled study, 248 consecutive patients (age more than 40 yrs) admitted for major abdominal surgery were randomized to one of three prophylactic antithrombotic treatments. Eighty-five patients received subcutaneous heparin, 74 patients had graduated compression stockings to the knee (TED stockings), and 89 patients had both subcutaneous heparin and stockings. Treatment began on the evening before operation and continued to complete mobilization, or for not less than five days postoperatively. On the fourth or fifth postoperative day, the patients underwent a 99mTc-plasmin test of the lower limbs as a test for deep vein thrombosis. There were 29.7% positive tests in the stocking group, 29.4% in the group with heparin prophylaxis, and 25.8% in the combined group. Differences between treatments were not statistically significant.
A prospective, randomized clinical trial in 83 patients undergoing open urological operations was performed to compare the relative prophylactic efficacy of low-dose heparin and external pneumatic compression (EPC) of the calves in comparison to no treatment in the prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis was established by the I125 fibrinogen scan and contrast phlebography. The data indicate that EPC is more effective than no treatment (p less than 0.04) and more effective than low-dose heparin (p less than 0.04) in the prevention of DVT. There was one pulmonary embolus in each of the three groups, and in the treatment groups this occurred without evidence of DVT.
To date the management of pulmonary thrombo-embolism is still largely limited to anticoagulation. Heparin and oral anticoagulation have been shown to be effective in reducing recurrence and death in venous thrombo-embolism. During the acute stage, systemic thrombolytic therapy has also been advocated for the rapid dissolution of the thrombus in patients with haemodynamic instability. We describe four patients with acute pulmonary thrombo-embolism who were managed with catheter-based thrombus manipulation with intrapulmonary thrombolysis. This management strategy should be considered in patients with pulmonary thrombo-embolism who continue to deteriorate despite conventional management with anticoagulation or systemic thrombolysis.
The purpose of this article is to report four patients with massive pulmonary embolism treated with percutaneous catheter and guidewire fragmentation and local administration of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (r-TPA). Four patients with massive pulmonary embolism initially underwent pulmonary angiography. Thrombus fragmentation was performed with both standard angiographic guidewires and catheters followed by local infusion of 41-200 mg of r-TPA. Pulmonary angiography was repeated after treatment. All patients survived with improvement in their clinical status and eventual discharge from hospital. Angiography in all patients post treatment demonstrated improvement in pulmonary perfusion (mean Miller score before treatment 22.5; mean Miller score after treatment 5.75). No patient had a significant complication. Mechanical fragmentation of the thrombus followed by local infusion of r-TPA was an effective treatment for massive pulmonary embolism in these four patients with no significant complications.
PURPOSE: To report the results of thrombus fragmentation in combination with local fibrinolysis using recombinant human-tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) in patients with massive pulmonary embolism. METHODS: Five patients with massive pulmonary embolism were treated with thrombus fragmentation followed by intrapulmonary injection of rtPA. Clot fragmentation was performed with a guidewire, angiographic catheter, and balloon catheter. Three patients had undergone recent surgery; one of them received a reduced dosage of rtPA. RESULTS: All patients survived and showed clinical improvement with a resultant significant (p < 0.05) decrease in the pulmonary blood pressure (mean systolic pulmonary blood pressure before treatment, 49 mmHg; 4 hr after treatment, 28 mmHg). Angiographic follow-up in three patients revealed a decrease in thrombus material and an increase in pulmonary perfusion. Two patients developed retroperitoneal hematomas requiring transfusion. CONCLUSION: Clot fragmentation and local fibrinolysis with rtPA was an effective therapy for massive pulmonary embolism. Bleeding at the puncture site was a frequent complication.
Rapid restoration of pulmonary blood flow is important in preventing death due to a massive pulmonary embolus. Devices developed specifically for percutaneous transvenous removal of pulmonary emboli are bulky and their insertion through a cut down or by the use of a large venous sheath can lead to bleeding at the entry site. In 3 patients with acute massive pulmonary embolism, conventional cardiac catheters were used to break up the embolus and disperse the fragments distally. Cardiac output was rapidly restored in all patients. There were no serious complications. This technique requires no more specialist equipment or skill than those needed for temporary cardiac pacing and could be important for the emergency management of patients with acute severe pulmonary embolism.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that pioglitazone may improve glucose metabolism and lipid parameters in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled on insulin. The inappropriate synthesis employed means that the authors' conclusions should be treated with a considerable degree of caution since they are not based on randomised data.
The paper describes the spontaneous recovery of language abilities of 52 stroke patients who were aphasic for more than 4 weeks. These patients had been randomly allocated to receive no speech therapy and had been assessed at 6-weekly intervals after a stroke. There was improvement in language abilities over time. Age, sex and aphasia type were not related to the amount of improvement. An aphasic patient's level of language ability at 6 months could be predicted on the basis of the test score on the Porch Index of Communicative Ability at 4 weeks.
Ninety-four patients with deep vein thrombosis of inferior limbs were randomly allocated to receive sodium heparin either by subcutaneous injections or by continuous intravenous infusion for six days. No significant difference was observed in the therapeutic efficiency as judged by phlebographic examinations and in rate of symptomatic pulmonary embolism between the two groups. There was one instance of major bleeding in the subcutaneous group. Minor bleedings occurred in 10 of the 48 patients treated with subcutaneous heparin and in 13 of the 46 patients receiving intravenous heparin. The results showed that subcutaneous injections of sodium heparin are as effective and safe as continuous intravenous infusion of this drug in the treatment of deep vein thrombosis.
Two studies have been done to establish recommendations for dosage and dose adjustment in the treatment of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). In the first, 56 patients were randomized in a double blind study to be treated either with unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH s.c. every 12 h. Initial doses were given according to age and sex, disregarding bodyweight, and the dose was then adjusted when the peak plasma heparin concentration fell outside the desired range of 0.5-0.8 anti-FXa U/ml. There were fewer dose adjustments in the LMWH group. The correlation between injected dose (U/kg bodyweight) and the heparin concentration was higher in the LMWH group (r = 0.59) than in the UFH group (r = 0.38). The results suggest that, in order to obtain the desired heparin concentration, the initial dose of LMWH should be about 100 U/kg bodyweight every 12 h. In the second, open study, this dosage plan was followed in 15 patients. The peak heparin concentration on Day 2 ranged from 0.40 to 0.75 anti-FXa U/ml and adjustment was only required in 3 patients. Day to day variation in peak heparin activity in the individual patient varied little (CV 11-22%), and there was no accumulation. The results indicate that plasma heparin concentration is more predictable using LMWH than UFH, and they point to definite advantages in the use of LMWH in a bodyweight adjusted dosage.
Low molecular weight heparin fractions have been demonstrated as efficient as low doses of standard heparin in preventing post-operative deep-vein thrombosis. Several clinical studies are, now, carrying out in patients with acute deep-vein thrombosis in order to assess efficacy and safety of low molecular weight heparin fractions as compared to standard heparin. In a randomised study including patients with deep-vein thrombosis treated either with low molecular weight heparin or with subcutaneously standard heparin, we demonstrated an effectiveness, in terms of thrombus reduction, of low molecular weight heparin as well as standard heparin. However, low molecular weight heparin seemed to be safer than standard heparin.
In a double-blind study, patients with phlebographically proven deep venous thrombosis (DVT) were treated with subcutaneous injections twice a day of either unfractionated heparin (UH; n = 27) or low molecular weight heparin (LH; n = 29) for 7 days, and the dose was adjusted until therapeutic range was reached, according to a chromogenic substrate anti-Xa assay. Forty-eight percent of the LH group did not need dose adjustment as compared to 24% of the UH group. During the course of heparin administration, deviation from initial heparin activity was frequent in both groups, but mean activity did not indicate a cumulative effect in either group. There was 1 incidence of pulmonary embolism (LH) and only 1 minor bleeding episode (UH). Half of the patients in both groups were phlebographically improved. We conclude that subcutaneous heparin treatment with UH or LH appears safe and convenient.
One-hundred and forty-one patients with clinical signs of acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in the legs were randomly allocated to receive heparin either as two daily subcutaneous injections (s.c.) or as continuous intravenous infusion (i.v.). The thrombi extended into the popliteal or femoral veins in 83% of the patients. Verification of diagnosis and evaluation of therapy was performed by phlebography, plethysmography and thermography. The results showed that heparin administered s.c. twice daily was as efficient as continuous i.v. infusion in preventing extension of the thrombus. In two patients the s.c. administration was stopped due to local haematomas at the injection sites. Retroperitoneal or intramuscular bleedings occurred in four patients, two in each group. Two major, non-fatal pulmonary emboli occurred, one in each group.
48 patients with acute deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs were treated with sodium heparin. In 23 patients heparin was injected subcutaneously (s.c.) twice a day and in 25 patients heparin was given by continuous intravenous perfusion (i.v.). Pain and edema disappeared after 8.7 days (s.c.) and 11.7 days (i.v.) respectively. One non fatal pulmonary embolism occurred in each group. A second venography was performed in 24 patients after 7 days of treatment and revealed no difference between the two groups. As judged by repeated thrombin time determination, anticoagulation was ineffective on at least one day in 39% of patients treated subcutaneously and in 60% of patients treated intravenously. The two pulmonary embolisms occurred in patients with ineffective anticoagulation. It is concluded that heparin may be used either intravenously or subcutaneously in the treatment of acute deep venous thrombosis. Thromboembolic complications occurred with both methods of treatment when anticoagulation was ineffective.
PURPOSE: To evaluate preliminary clinical experience in humans with the Recovery nitinol filter (RNF) for the inferior vena cava, especially the efficacy of the device and safety of its retrieval. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-two patients were followed up to assess for filter efficacy and for ability to remove the filter. RESULTS: Sixteen men and 16 women aged 18-83 years (mean, 53 years) underwent treatment with the RNF. Indications for placement were recent pulmonary embolism (n = 16), recent deep venous thrombosis (n = 20), and/or prophylaxis (n = 2). Four patients had contraindications to anticoagulant therapy, and four had complications from anticoagulant therapy. The filter was successfully placed in 32 patients. In 24 (100%) of 24 patients, the filter was successfully retrieved with a jugular approach. The mean implantation period was 53 days (range, 5-134 days). Trapped thrombus was seen within the filter in seven cases. In one patient with a large trapped thrombus, the filter was noted to have migrated 4 cm cephalad. There were no episodes of pulmonary embolism or insertion-site thrombosis. CONCLUSION: This preliminary experience in humans confirms the efficacy of the RNF. It also demonstrates the feasibility and safety of retrieval up to 134 days after implantation.
166 patients aged 40-80 years were included in a controlled, randomized, double-blind study to determine the efficacy and safety of a single daily injection of a low molecular weight (LMW) heparin for prevention of deep-vein thrombosis compared to low dose conventional heparin. Patients received 1 x 1.500 aPTT units of a LMW heparin fraction (plus 2 x placebo injection) or 3 x 5.000 IU of an unfractionated heparin. During 10 days of treatment, patients underwent repeated clinical investigation, serial impedance plethysmography, and Doppler sonography for detection of thrombosis of the lower limbs. Combined application of these methods revealed evidence of thrombosis in 4.5% of patients on unfractionated heparin and 3.6% of patients on LMW heparin. Subcutaneous hematomas were significantly smaller in diameter upon treatment with LMW heparin (p less than 0.001). Antithrombin III levels were significantly higher at the end of the observation period in the LMW heparin group (p less than 0.005). Thrombocyte count, transaminases, creatinine, and haemoglobin did not change in either group. The results indicate that LMW heparin administered by a single s.c. dose daily may be as effective as low dose heparin in prevention of deep venous thrombosis in medical inpatients.
The effect of prophylactic low-dose heparin on mortality was tested in 1358 consecutive patients admitted to the medical wards of an acute care hospital. Eligibility for treatment or exclusion was ascertained on admission by predefined contraindications. Eligible patients with even-number hospital records were assigned to treatment (5000 U twice daily), those with odd-number records served as controls. Because determination of eligibility was open to bias, evaluation of treatment was based on comparison of the total even-number group (669 patients, of which 411 were treated with heparin), and the total odd-number group (689 patients, none treated with heparin). Mortality was significantly lower in the even-number group-7.8% (52 of 669 patients) versus 10.9% (75 of 689 patients) in the odd-number group; the difference increased consistently with length of hospitalization (p = 0.025). The estimated reduction in mortality attributable to heparin was 31.1%. We believe that low-dose heparin prophylaxis is appropriate in all immobilized medical patients who are not at risk of bleeding.
This pharmacodynamic study examined weight-based dosing of the low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), tinzaparin, in heavyweight/obese subjects. Single doses (175 and 75 IU/kg) were administered subcutaneously (SC) to 37 healthy heavy-weight subjects (101-165 kg; 26-61 kg/m2). AUA and Amax values of anti-Xa and anti-IIa activities were consistent over these body weight and body mass index (BMI) ranges, indicating that tinzaparin pharmacodynamics are not influenced by body weight or BMI. The range of AUA and Amax values in the study population overlapped that of historical control normal-weight subjects (<100 kg), indicating that weight-adjusted tinzaparin dosing yields a predictable response regardless of body weight or BMI. Tinzaparin was well tolerated, although injection site bruising was commonly reported. SC tinzaparin dosing in heavy or obese patients is appropriate based on body weight alone; the dose need not be capped at a maximal absolute dose.
Venous thromboembolism is a frequent complication in patients admitted to intensive care units (ICU), despite prophylactic treatment with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight (LMW) heparin. We postulated that poor efficacy of subcutaneous heparin might be due to administration of vasopressors, which could cause impaired peripheral circulation and inadequate systemic bioavailability of the anticoagulant. We compared concentrations of factor Xa activity in three groups of 15 patients: individuals in ICU who had and had not received vasopressors, and general surgery patients. Those who received vasopressors had lower plasma concentrations of factor-Xa activity than patients in ICU not on vasopressors and postoperative controls. Patients in ICU who take vasopressors could need higher doses of LMW heparin, or a different mode of administration of the drug, to attain adequate thrombosis prophylaxis.
One hundred hospital in-patients treated for pulmonary embolism (PE) and/or deep vein thrombosis (DVT) were randomly allocated to receive 3 or 6 weeks' anticoagulation with heparin and warfarin. At one year recurrence rates were 12% in the 6 week group and 10% in those treated for 3 weeks. No patient died as a result of recurrence. Our study suggests that 3 weeks' anticoagulation therapy, using intravenous heparin for the first 5 days and warfarin from the third day, is adequate for patients without persisting risk factors.
The need for oral anticoagulation in patients with calf-vein thrombosis was examined in a randomised study of 51 patients, of whom 23 received warfarin for 3 months and 28 did not. Both groups received an initial course of heparin and all wore compression stockings. Progress was monitored by the use of serial isotope tests and physical examination. Phlebography was repeated if recurrence was suspected. During the first 3 months, 8 patients in the non-warfarin group (29%) had recurrences compared with none in the warfarin group (p less than 0.01). 5 patients had recurrence with proximal extension and 1 patient had a pulmonary embolus. After 1 year, 22 out of 23 patients in the warfarin group had not had a recurrence, compared with 19 out of 28 (p less than 0.02). The findings indicate that oral anticoagulants should be given to all patients with thrombi that produce symptoms. Treatment for 3 months seems to be sufficient.
The length of time for which deep vein thrombosis (DVT) should be treated with oral anticoagulants (OA) is controversial. In this study, 135 patients with symptomatic first period DVT (83% with proximal DVT) were randomly allocated to OA for one or six months. The diagnosis of initial and recurrent DVT was confirmed by phlebography or plethysmography and thermography, or by a combination of all these methods. Pulmonary emboli were confirmed by lung scans or at autopsy. The patients were followed for at least one year. One patient had to discontinue OA prematurely because of haemorrhage. Seventeen patients left the project for other reasons, ten during and seven after therapy; in one of these DVT recurred. The recurrence rate during the first year was high (17% symptomatic recurrences) irrespective of whether OA had been given for one or six months.
Eighty patients with deep vein thrombosis (DVT) were randomized between our routine duration of oral anticoagulation and 50% reduction thereof, in order to evaluate whether shorter therapy could be given without increased risks. The study was stratified, so that 20 patients with the 1st episode of DVT caused by a temporary risk factor were treated for 1.5 or 3 months, 40 patients with the 1st episode of DVT caused by a permanent risk factor for 3 or 6 months, and 20 patients with the 2nd episode of DVT for 6 or 12 months. When warfarin therapy was discontinued, the patients were followed by means of venous occlusion plethysmography every 3 months for 1 year, and clinically for 15-27 months in the different subgroups. Thromboembolic complications were registered and verified by venography and perfusion lung scan. We could not detect any difference between the groups. The rate of rethrombosis and embolism during 12 and 24 months after cessation of anticoagulant therapy was 8 and 10%, respectively, among the patients with reduced duration of treatment and 8 and 14%, respectively, among those with regular duration. One fatal, warfarin-induced hemorrhage occurred. It is important to reduce unnecessary extension of oral anticoagulation after DVT in order to minimize the negative side-effects without increasing the recurrence rate. More extensive trials should be performed to confirm our results and define the optimal duration of treatment.
Deep-vein thrombosis is common after plaster-cast immobilisation for traumatic injury. We did a randomised prospective study of the effect of low-molecular-weight heparin on the incidence of deep-vein thrombosis in patients with minor injuries treated with plaster-cast immobilisation of the leg. A control group (n = 163) received no prophylaxis, the prophylaxis group received low-molecular-weight heparin once daily (n = 176). The incidence of deep-vein thrombosis in the prophylaxis group was 0% (one tailed p < 0.006) vs 4.3% in the control group. No severe side-effects of low-molecular-weight heparin were observed. Thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin once daily is effective in reducing the risk of deep-vein thrombosis in outpatients with plaster-cast immobilisation of the leg.
253 outpatients were included in a prospective randomized study. All patients had incidence of injuries of the lower limb immobilized by a plaster cast. 126 patients (group I) received a subcutaneous injection of Fraxiparin daily, and 127 patients (group II) received no thromboprophylaxis. Without prophylaxis 21 (16.5%) cases developed a thrombosis, and with prophylaxis a thrombosis could be proven in 6 (4.8%) patients only (p < 0.01). Thus, for all patients with an injury of the lower limb being immobilized by a plaster cast, a thromboprophylaxis with a low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended.
PURPOSE: We initiated a prospective study to verify or refute the complications of lymphocele formation and excessive blood loss associated with heparin prophylaxis in pelvic lymphadenectomy and radical prostatectomy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective study was completed on 579 men undergoing pelvic lymphadenectomy usually in association with radical prostatectomy. Patients were assigned to group 1 (given preoperative and postoperative subcutaneous heparin) and group 2 (no heparin). All patients were evaluated 2 to 3 weeks after surgery with ultrasound for pelvic lymphocele. RESULTS: There was no statistically significant difference in the number or size of pelvic lymphoceles or blood loss in group 1 versus group 2. CONCLUSIONS: The use of heparin prophylaxis to prevent thromboembolic complications in conjunction with pelvic lymphadenectomy and radical prostatectomy is not associated with increased blood loss or increased rate of lymphocele formation.
INTRODUCTION: Pneumatic compression stocking (PCS) devices have been introduced to decrease the incidence of postoperative deep venous thrombosis (DVT). However, their role in the prophylaxis against pulmonary embolism (PE) remains unclear. This study was undertaken to compare the prophylactic effectiveness of subcutaneous heparin (SCH) alone vs the combined use of PCS and SCH in the prevention of PE following cardiac surgery. METHODS: We studied 2,551 consecutive patients who underwent cardiac surgery over a 10-year period. They were randomly allocated to two groups. Group A included 1,196 patients who were treated with 5,000 U of SCH every 12 h and group B included 1,355 patients treated with a combined prophylactic regimen of PCS and SCH. RESULTS: The diagnosis of PE was established in 69 patients by either high-probability ventilation perfusion scan, pulmonary angiogram, or autopsy. The incidence of PE in group A patients was 4% (48/1,196) and in group B was 1.5% (21/1,355). The concomitant use of bilateral PCS and SCH reduced the frequency of postoperative PE in 62% in comparison to the prophylaxis with SCH alone (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the combined prophylactic method of bilateral PCS and SCH is superior to SCH alone in the prevention of PE after cardiac surgery.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of intermittent pneumatic compression of the plantar venous plexus with the newly developed arteriovenous impulse system. Seventy-four patients about to undergo primary unilateral total hip arthroplasty for osteoarthrosis, all receiving a standard thrombosis prophylaxis regime of thigh-length anti-embolic stockings, 5,000 IU heparin delivered subcutaneously twice daily, and 400 mg hydroxychloroquine sulfate delivered twice daily, were entered in a prospective trial. The patients were allocated at random to also receive the arteriovenous impulse system on the foot of the operated side. On approximately postoperative day 12 bilateral ascending venography was performed. There were 44 patients in the nonpumped group and 30 patients in the pumped group. The incidence of deep venous thrombosis was 6.6% in the pumped group and 27.27% in the nonpumped group. The incidence of thrombosis was significantly lower in the pumped group (P < .025). The authors conclude that chemical prophylaxis plus the use of the mechanical, pneumatic, and arteriovenous impulse system reduces the incidence of thromboembolic complications further than chemical prophylaxis alone.
We initiated a prospective, partially randomized trial of the effects of perioperative prophylactic mini-dose heparin on the incidence of clinically evident pulmonary emboli, intraoperative blood loss, blood transfusions, duration of postoperative pelvic drainage, and lymphocele formation in 68 consecutive patients undergoing radical retropubic prostatectomy. We treated 32 patients with mini-dose heparin and 36 without it. We detected pulmonary emboli in 4 (11%) patients not treated with mini-dose heparin and in none treated with heparin (p = 0.052). Anesthesiologists estimated a mean intraoperative blood loss of 2,152 cc in the heparinized patients compared with 1,886 cc in controls (p = 0.2). At a time when our policy was to replace all blood loss, we transfused a mean of 3.9 units to heparinized patients and 3.2 units to controls (p = 0.1). Persistent lymphatic drainage requiring more than six days of closed suction drainage occurred in 12 of 32 (38%) heparinized patients as compared with 4 of 36 (11%) controls (p = 0.01). We discontinued the study after 68 patients because of the morbidity associated with mini-dose heparin. Because of the associated morbidity we do not recommend the routine use of mini-dose heparin in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy.
Two hundred and four consecutive patients with venographically confirmed deep vein thrombosis (DVT) were randomised either to a low molecular weight heparin, Fragmin, administered subcutaneously (s.c.) once daily as a fixed dose of 200 IU anti-factor Xa/kg or to continuous intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin (UFH). The UFH dose was adjusted to maintain the activated partial thromboplastin time between 1.5 and 3.0 times the upper limit of the reference value at each centre. Fragmin or UFH was given for a minimum of 5 days until anticoagulation with warfarin, given from day 1, was established (i.e. an Internation Normalised Ratio, of 2.0-3.0). A second venogram was obtained after Fragmin or UFH treatment. There were no significant differences in the change in mean Marder score before and after treatment between the two treatment groups, irrespective of thrombus localisation. No major bleeding events, symptomatic pulmonary embolism, symptomatic thrombosis progression or death occurred during hospitalisation. Eight documented venous thromboembolic events occurred before the follow-up visit 6 months after randomisation: 5 in patients treated with Fragmin and 3 in those treated with UFH. Six of these events occurred after cessation of warfarin treatment. In conclusion Fragmin given s.c. once daily in a fixed dose adjusted for body weight, is no less effective or safe than a continuous infusion of UFH in the initial treatment of acute DVT.
In view of the potential of low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH) to simplify initial therapy and allow outpatient treatment of proximal deep-vein thrombosis, we undertook a randomised comparison of fixed-dose subcutaneous LMWH with adjusted-dose intravenous standard heparin in the initial treatment of this disorder. Our main objectives were to compare the efficacy of these regimens for 6 months of follow-up and to assess the risk of clinically important bleeding. Of 170 consecutive symptomatic patients with venographically proven proximal deep-venous thrombosis, 85 received standard heparin (to achieve an activated partial thromboplastin time of 1.5 to 2.0 times the pretreatment value) and 85 LMWH (adjusted only for body weight) for 10 days. Oral coumarin was started on day 7 and continued for at least 3 months. The frequency of recurrent venous thromboembolism diagnosed objectively did not differ significantly between the standard-heparin and LMWH groups (12 [14%] vs 6 [7%]; difference 7% [95% confidence interval -3% to 15%]; p = 0.13). Clinically important bleeding was infrequent in both groups (3.5% for standard heparin vs 1.1% for LMWH; p greater than 0.2). We conclude that fixed-dose subcutaneous LMWH is at least as effective and safe as intravenous adjusted-dose heparin in the initial treatment of symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. Since there is no need for laboratory monitoring with the LMWH regimen, patients with venous thrombosis can be treated at home.
The standard treatment of deep vein thrombosis is given by continuous intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin. This entails hospitalisation, nursing care, immobility and repeated laboratory tests (e.g. activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT], platelet count). In addition approximately 10% of patients suffer major haemorrhages. The potential advantages of a low molecular weight heparin (CY 216) given subcutaneously were explored in a randomised trial with blind quantitative evaluation of venograms. The study included 166 patients and both "therapeutic efficacy" and "intention to-treat" analyses showed that subcutaneous CY 216 in fixed doses based only on body weight was more effective on the Arnesen and Marder phlebographic scores than continuous i.v. standard heparin with daily dose adjustment according to results of coagulation tests. There was no increase in the risks of pulmonary embolism, haemorrhage or clot extension.
CONTEXT: Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the most frequent complication following craniotomy for brain tumors. At Brigham and Women's Hospital, VTE after craniotomy for brain tumor is the leading cause of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) among patients hospitalized for conditions other than VTE. OBJECTIVE: To minimize VTE among patients undergoing craniotomy for brain tumor. DESIGN: Randomized, prospective, double-blind clinical trial. SETTING: Brigham and Women's Hospital. PATIENTS: One hundred fifty patients undergoing craniotomy for brain tumor randomized to enoxaparin, 40 mg/d, vs heparin, 5,000 U bid, with all patients receiving graduated compression stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The rate of DVT detected by venous ultrasonography prior to hospital discharge. RESULTS: Symptomatic DVT or PE developed in none of the patients. The overall rate of asymptomatic VTE was 9.3%, with no significant difference in the rates between the two prophylaxis groups. Ten of the 14 patients identified with VTE had thrombus limited to the deep veins of the calf. CONCLUSIONS: Enoxaparin, 40 mg/d, or unfractionated heparin, 5,000 U bid, in combination with graduated compression stockings, intermittent pneumatic compression, and predischarge surveillance venous ultrasonography of the legs, resulted in 150 consecutive patients without symptomatic VTE. The low 9.3% frequency of asymptomatic VTE comprised mostly isolated calf DVT. Therefore, this comprehensive, multimodality approach to VTE prophylaxis achieved excellent efficacy and safety.
The records of 32 cancer patients who were treated with heparin sodium and warfarin sodium for thromboembolic disease were reviewed. Standard techniques for anticoagulation were neither safe nor effective. Sixteen patients experienced 21 different hemorrhagic complications. Eight patients had major hemorrhages that led to cessation of therapy or death. Six of 32 patients had pulmonary embolisms while receiving anticoagulants. It is suggested that venous interruption may be a safer and more effective method of prophylaxis against pulmonary embolism in cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Venous thromboembolism is a major cause of postoperative morbidity and mortality in neurosurgery. The use of low-dose unfractionated heparin therapy perioperatively for prophylaxis against deep vein thromboses and pulmonary embolism has been well demonstrated in many other surgical specialties but is less commonly used in neurosurgery because of fears of devastating postoperative hematomas. METHODS: The safety of such therapy has been analyzed in 950 patients undergoing an inpatient neurosurgical procedure. 872 patients (152 cranial procedures) completed treatment with 5000 U sodium heparin subcutaneously twice a day, commencing before surgery and continuing till patients were ambulatory. RESULTS: There were three minor hemorrhagic complications-two superficial wound hematomas (one requiring treatment) and one gastrointestinal hemorrhage-identified. Three clinically significant major complications developed, two epidural hematomas after spinal surgery requiring evacuation and one intraventricular hemorrhage after brain biopsy. CONCLUSION: This report, along with an analysis of previously published reports of low-dose perioperative heparin therapy in neurosurgical patients, suggests that such therapy is unlikely to be associated with increased morbidity. Given the known efficacy of low-dose heparin in reducing venous thromboembolism in other surgical patients, such therapy may reduce mortality and morbidity from thromboembolic complications in neurosurgical patients with minimal risk.
We studied the difference in postoperative thrombotic complications after major spinal surgery between two commonly used external compression devices. Our 136 subjects were prospectively randomized to receive either thigh-high sequential pneumatic compression wraps or pneumatic foot-compression wraps. All were studied postoperatively with duplex ultrasonography and analyzed for leg swelling, the rate of thrombotic events, and overall subjective patient comfort. The rate of postoperative thrombosis was 1.5%. The one pulmonary embolism was successfully treated with heparin. One other patient had a small asymptomatic thrombus of the saphenous vein. Both subjects wore foot wraps. Subjectively, the devices were rated as being equally comfortable. We believe that external compression for thrombosis prophylaxis after major spinal surgery is effective. The particular device chosen may be driven by other factors such as cost, physician or nursing preference, and ease of application.
In a prospective, randomized, double-blind investigation of anticoagulant agents for prevention of deep vein thrombosis in patients undergoing operations at the lumbar-vertebral disc, 179 patients were randomly allocated to two groups. 87 patients received a fixed combination of low-molecular weight heparin 1,500 U-aPTT plus dihydroergotamine 0.5 mg (LMWH/DHE) once a day and additionally one injection of placebo per day, 92 patients received a fixed combination of sodium heparin 5,000 U plus dihydroergotamine 0.5 mg (HDHE) twice a day. Treatment was initiated two hours preoperatively in both groups and continued for at least seven days. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT), detected by the 125Iodine-labelled fibrinogen uptake-test, occurred in four patients treated with LMWH/DHE and in three patients with HDHE. In all seven patients phlebography was performed, confirming the diagnosis of DVT in one patient of the LMWH/DHE group and in two patients of the HDHE group, only. No increased bleeding was found in either group. Especially no neurological complications caused by epidural bleeding were observed. We therefore recommended to treat routineously all patients undergoing operations at the vertebral disc with antithrombotic agents. The advantages of the once daily regimen with low-molecular weight heparin include better patients' acceptance and less nursing time.
Post-operative deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is a frequent and potentially life-threatening complication in neurosurgery. In this field of surgery, with its special demands for exact haemostasis, prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis with anticoagulant drugs has been utilized only reluctantly. Postoperative pneumatic muscle compression (EPC) has been shown to be effective, although there are several practical considerations involved with this method which limit its clinical applicability. In the present study per-operative EPC was evaluated and was found to provide good protection against DVT in patients with increased risk from this complication. This method has the advantage of being effective, safe, inexpensive and readily practicable.
A prospective, randomized clinical trial in 95 patients undergoing neurosurgical operative procedures was performed to investigate the efficacy of external pneumatic compression (EPC) of the calves as compared with results in a control group that received no specific form of prophylaxis for prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The diagnosis of DVT was established by the I125 fibrinogen scan and radiographic contrast phlebography. The data indicate that EPC provides significant protection against the development of DVT in comparison with results in the control group (p less than 0.005). There were no known pulmonary emboli in any of the EPC-treated patients. There were no complications of EPC.
Anticoagulation therapy in 74 patients with gynecologic malignancy and venous thromboembolism was evaluated as to hemorrhagic complications, recurrent thrombosis, and completion of prescribed course. Clinically significant bleeding complications occurred in 25 patients and the course of anticoagulant therapy was not completed in 29 patients because of bleeding complications or death within 3 months. Venous thromboembolism recurred in 11% of patients. Risk factors associated with hemorrhagic complications and unsuccessful completion of anticoagulation therapy include advanced age, advanced stage of malignancy, incomplete surgical resection of tumor, and systemic chemotherapy. Complications of anticoagulant therapy were found to be excessive when compared to those in reports dealing with noncancer patients and may exceed the benefits of therapy in certain patients. Alternative methods of management for this group of high-risk patients are discussed.
BACKGROUND: Central vein catheters, which are used in the treatment of cancer patients, are prone to thrombotic complications of the catheter or adjacent vein. Previous studies suggest that 1 mg warfarin daily (minidose) can significantly reduce that risk. AIMS: This, study aims to establish whether minidose warfarin could reduce catheter-related thrombosis in adult patients with haematological malignancies. METHODS: Patients were randomly selected to receive warfarin or not. The end-points studied were: (i) occlusion by thrombus, (ii) removal of catheter for other reasons or (iii) 90 days free of thrombus. RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the incidence of catheter thrombosis or venous thrombosis and no significant variation in catheter survival between the study and control groups. CONCLUSIONS: This study found no benefit of the routine use of minidose warfarin for prophylaxis of central vein' catheter thrombosis in patients with haematological malignancies and therefore does not support the routine use of minidose warfarin for prophylaxis in such patients.
CRD COMMENTARY: The review focuses on a well defined review question. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were appropriate. The validity of the included studies was adequately assessed and the authors performed further analyses to compare outcomes in trials with a methodological quality a score of less than 7 with trials with a score of 7 or better.
The literature search could have been extended to include other databases such as EMBASE. An attempt could also have been made to identify unpublished material and grey literature. Publication bias can not be ruled out. Some details of the individual studies were presented, but it would also have been useful to report the length of treatment and follow-up time. The primary studies were combined despite the presence of heterogeneity in most of the comparisons.
The conclusions follow from the results, but both should be interpreted with caution due to the heterogeneity present.
A new anti-epileptic drug, tiagabine, is a potent inhibitor of GABA uptake into neurons and glia. Tiagabine has shown promising efficacy and safety profiles as add-on treatment for partial seizures. We evaluated the long-term effects of tiagabine on cognition and EEG in 37 patients with partial epilepsy. The study protocol consisted of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group add-on study and an open-label extension study. During the 3 month double-blind phase at low doses (30 mg/day) tiagabine treatment did not cause any cognitive or EEG changes as compared with placebo. Tiagabine treatment did not cause deterioration in cognitive performance or produce any rhythmic slow-wave activity or other constant, new abnormalities on EEG during longer follow-up with successful treatment on higher doses after 6-12 months (mean 65.7 mg/day, range 30-80 mg/day) and after 18-24 months (mean dose 67.6 mg/day, range 24-80 mg/day). The daily dosages in the long-term follow-up of the present study are higher than in the previous reports.

The aim of this study was to compare 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 with 4% succinylated gelatin for priming the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit and as volume replacement in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass, in terms of postoperative bleeding, blood transfusion requirements, renal function, and outcome after surgery. Forty-five patients received 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 (Voluven) and another 45 were given 4% succinylated gelatin (Gelofusine) as the priming solution for the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit as well as for volume replacement. Postoperative bleeding was quantified from the hourly chest drainage in the first 4 h and at 24 h postoperatively. The baseline characteristics of both groups were similar. In the hydroxyethyl starch group, the total amount of colloid used was 1.9 +/- 1.0 L, while the gelatin group had 2.0 +/- 0.7 L. There was no significant difference in hourly chest drainage between groups. Blood transfusion requirements, estimated glomerular filtration rate, extubation time, intensive care unit and hospital stay were similar in both groups. It was concluded that 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 is a safe alternative colloid for priming the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit and volume replacement in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of reminiscence therapy on depression in older adults. The authors concluded that this intervention may be an effective treatment for this group. However, the methods used to conduct the review were not well reported, and minimal results were presented. The evidence available is therefore weak and the conclusions reflect this.
The objective of this systematic review was to examine the technical and diagnostic capability of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to identify carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). Two independent authors retrieved and screened the existing data and extracted the clinical and validity data adhering to predefined inclusion criteria. The MRI methods and findings were analyzed by two experienced radiologists. Disagreements were solved in consensus. The MRI findings of 373 affected wrists in 13 studies were compared with asymptomatic referents or a series of patients with non-CTS wrist pain. Increased T2-signal, cross-sectional area, and flattening of the median nerve inside the carpal tunnel, as well as bowing of the flexor retinaculum, were the most frequently occurring signs in CTS. Reliable assessment of the sensitivity and specificity of certain MRI signs in respect to CTS remained difficult due to study heterogeneity. There is an obvious need for imaging studies in which validated diagnostic criteria are used.

The purpose of this 20-week, open-label, randomized clinical trial was to evaluate the effect of rosuvastatin on fasting serum lipids and lipoproteins, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), and the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in 91 patients with chronic kidney disease. Patients were randomized to rosuvastatin 10 mg/day (n = 48) or to no lipid-lowering treatment (n = 43) for 20 weeks. In contrast to patients not receiving rosuvastatin, patients receiving rosuvastatin tended to derive more favorable improvements from baseline values in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (-43%, p <0.001, vs 7%, p = NS; p <0.001 for change with rosuvastatin treatment vs change with no antilipemic treatment), hs-CRP (-47%, p <0.001, vs 7%, p = NS; p <0.001 for change with rosuvastatin treatment vs change with no antilipemic treatment), and GFR (11%, p <0.05, vs 4%, p = NS; p = NS for change with rosuvastatin treatment vs change with no antilipemic treatment).

Many reports on the diagnostic efficacy of the [13C] urea breath test ([13C] UBT) for the detection of Helicobacter pylori in the residual stomach have shown negative results. We previously reported on the utility of [13C] UBT and conducted an evaluation to establish a standardized protocol with a shorter sampling time for [13C] UBT in partial gastrectomy patients. Sixty-two patients who had undergone partial gastrectomy were included. The [13C] UBT protocol included ingestion of 100 mg [13C] urea, use of mouthwash, and the body in a horizontal position on the left side. The sensitivity of [13C] UBT was 95.7%. Thirty minutes and a cutoff of 2.0 per thousand were found to be optimal for the test, with the body position horizontal on the left side. In the present protocol [13C] UBT appears to be a reliable and convenient tool with the same accuracy rate as other routine tests in patients with a remnant stomach.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of adding nonopioid agents to local anaesthetic agents for caudal blockade in children. The authors concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of adding clonidine, ketamine or midazolam to local anaesthetic agents. The authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
Thimerosal, a derivative of mercury, is used as a preservative in hepatitis B vaccines. We measured total mercury levels before and after the administration of this vaccine in 15 preterm and 5 term infants. Comparison of pre- and post-vaccination mercury levels showed a significant increase in both preterm and term infants after vaccination. Additionally, post-vaccination mercury levels were significantly higher in preterm infants as compared with term infants. Because mercury is known to be a potential neurotoxin to infants, further study of its pharmacodynamics is warranted.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that psychosocial interventions that involved family members in the treatment of chronic physical diseases had positive effects on health outcome for the patient and his/her family. Further high-quality research was needed to investigate differential effects. High levels of heterogeneity in the analyses made the reliability of the authors' conclusions unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that patients prescribed anticholinergic drugs for overactive bladder were significantly more likely to experience constipation. This was a relatively well-conducted review and the authors' conclusion is likely to be reliable.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated female-condom use among women participating in an HIV/STD intervention designed to reduce unprotected sex and expand prevention strategies. METHODS: Women (n = 360) were recruited from a family-planning clinic and were randomized into an 8- or 4-session intervention group or a control group. We conducted follow-up interviews at 1, 6, and 12 months. RESULTS: At 1 month, the odds ratios of first-time female-condom use were 9.49 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 4.01, 22.20) in the 8-session group and 4.39 (95% CI = 1.84, 10.49) in the 4-session group relative to controls. Repeated use (n = 21) was predicted by perceived ability to use, by self and partner satisfaction, by dislike of male condoms, and by previous diaphragm use. CONCLUSIONS: Gender sensitive cognitive-behavioral interventions can influence women to try the female condom. To increase long-term use, interventions may need to include self-insertion practice and involvement of male partners.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that calcipotriene with or without corticosteroids was the treatment of choice for childhood psoriasis, followed by dithranol. Methotrexate was the systemic treatment of choice. Evidence on specific treatments was limited: based at most on one randomised controlled trial of unknown quality plus studies of less reliable design. This means that the conclusions should be interpreted with caution. 
A cohort of 785 patients treated without any form of thromboprophylaxis was compared with an identical group of 957 patients treated with 6 weeks of low-dose warfarin. All complications seen within 90 days of surgery were recorded. The control group had a total complication rate of 2.2%, with a death rate from thromboembolic disease of 0.0% and a total death rate of 0.2%. The warfarin group had a total complication rate of 4.7%, with a death rate from thromboembolic disease of 0.0% and a total death rate of 0.1%. Both deaths in the control group were from cardiac disease, while the death in the warfarin group was due to a massive gastrointestinal bleeding. The warfarin group had twice the infection rate of the control group.
OBJECTIVE: To test the efficacy of tyrosine supplementation, as an adjunct to dietary treatment, on neuropsychological test performance in individuals with phenylketonuria. DESIGN: A randomised controlled trial of tyrosine supplementation using a double blind crossover procedure with three four week phases. SETTING: The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto. PARTICIPANTS: 21 individuals with phenylketonuria (ages 6 to 28 years, mean 11.3). INTERVENTION: Participants were given 100 mg/kg body weight/d of L-tyrosine or L-alanine (placebo). RESULTS: At baseline, performance on several of the neuropsychological test measures was correlated with tyrosine levels. Dietary supplements of tyrosine increased plasma tyrosine concentrations; however, no change in test performance was found across the tyrosine and placebo phases of the study. CONCLUSIONS: Tyrosine supplementation of this type does not appear to alter neuropsychological performance in individuals with phenylketonuria.
CRD SUMMARY: This meta-analysis of 12 observational studies found that aspirin reduces the risk of prostate cancer, especially advanced cancers. The effect of other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs was less certain. The methods of analysis appeared appropriate, but the authors did not report methods to assess study relevance or validity. There was limited information on drug doses, which may limit clinical application of the findings.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed interventions aimed at reducing residential environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) exposure in youths. The authors concluded that interventions can reduce children's exposure to ETS. The lack of a quality assessment, the unknown validity of methods used to assess outcomes, and the inconsistent results among studies mean that the conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the relationship between provider volume and outcomes for oncological procedures. The authors concluded that high-volume providers significantly improve outcomes for pancreatectomy, oesophagectomy gastrectomy and rectal resection. Although this review has limitations that must be taken into consideration, the authors' conclusions are likely to be robust.
A literature search was conducted to collect randomized controlled studies evaluating the outcome of psychological and psychosocial interventions after attempted suicide and deliberate self-harm. Twenty-five studies meeting the inclusion criteria were identified. The studies are grouped according to the psychological approach chosen for the intervention. They are discussed with regard to both the various therapeutic strategies and models used, and the repetition of self-harming behavior as the main outcome.

CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated the effectiveness of behavioural interventions to change transfusion practices of physicians. The authors concluded that such interventions appeared appropriate in changing practice and reducing blood utilisation, although further studies are needed to determine the relative effectiveness of different types of interventions. The suitably cautious conclusion is appropriate and reflects limitations in the review process and included studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the efficacy of brief alcohol interventions (BAIs) for the reduction of alcohol consumption in patients attending primary care. The authors concluded that BAIs can be effective in reducing alcohol consumption, and their effects can last for 48 months. This was a relatively well-conducted review, and it is likely that the authors' conclusions are reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated opioid-related adverse events in studies of opioid sparing with cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors compared with placebo in post-operative pain. The authors concluded that opioid sparing with COX-2 inhibitors does not have a clinically beneficial effect on opioid-related adverse events. The conclusion appears reliable based on the data presented, although relevant studies might not have been included.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of extended low molecular weight heparin prophylaxis after hospital discharge on symptomatic venous thromboembolism in elective hip arthroplasty patients. The authors concluded that previous studies may have overestimated the effect and impact of such treatment. The conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated the effectiveness of non-pharmacological rehabilitation interventions for people with Parkinson's disease. The authors concluded that these interventions can affect patients' lives for the better in a variety of ways. However, publication bias cannot be ruled out, the clinical importance of the reported improvements is unclear, and more robust research is needed. Overall, the conclusions appear reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed rehabilitation programmes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The authors concluded that, compared with no rehabilitation, rehabilitation improved exercise capacity and reduced shortness of breath. Although it appears to be supported by the evidence presented, differences between the included studies limit the strength of this finding.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed treatments for ankle rehabilitation. The authors concluded that combinations of different exercises improve results, and that ankle disk training plus taping appeared to be the best method for improving range of motion. The evidence, which came from small studies of unknown quality that assessed different treatments, was limited and was insufficient to support the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared continued antidepressant treatment with discontinued treatment in patients with depressive disorder who had responded to treatment. The authors concluded that continued treatment with antidepressants would benefit many patients with recurrent depression. Although the review has some weaknesses, the authors make reasonable conclusions and acknowledge some of the review's limitations.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the substitution of soy-associated isoflavones for dairy and animal protein. The authors concluded that soy-associated isoflavones are not related to changes in low- or high-density lipoproteins. Given the limited search, lack of a quality assessment, and insufficient display of all relevant results, it is difficult to assess whether the authors' conclusions follow from the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the reliability of the Barthel Index (BI) for the functional assessment of older people. The authors concluded that there are uncertainties about the reliability of the BI when used with older people, and further research is required. Overall, this was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions reflect the limitations of the evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) inhibition on the development of type 2 diabetes in patients with arterial hypertension or congestive heart failure. The author concluded that RAS inhibition may help prevent type 2 diabetes. Given the lack of a quality assessment and the insufficient reporting of the review methods, the reliability of the author's conclusions cannot be adequately assessed.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed complications and functional outcomes after ileal pouch anal anastomosis. The authors concluded that the complication rates with current surgical techniques are significant and there is room for improvement. The review supports the authors' conclusions, but the reliability of the evidence is weakened by the limited search and the use of observational data with no comparison groups.
The aim of the present study was to perform a systematic review on the retention of resin-based sealants (RBSs) according to the material used and the clinical procedure. An electronic search in MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane library and SCOPUS was completed by a hand search in conference proceedings. One hundred and twenty-four studies were identified, 31 of which were included. The retention rate of auto-polymerized and light-cured RBSs did not differ significantly. Light-cured RBSs had a significantly higher retention rate than fluoride-containing light-cured RBSs at 48 months (RR = 0.80, 95% CI: 0.72-0.89) and more. Concerning the clinical procedure, the scarcity of well-conducted studies made judgement difficult, except for the isolation stage. If using a rubber dam did not affect retention of auto-polymerized RBSs, it did for fluoride-containing light-cured RBSs (RR = 2.03, 95% CI: 1.51-2.73).

CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) in people aged over 75 with acute coronary syndromes (mainly unstable angina). It concluded that CABG carries a high risk of mortality or complications while PCI is associated with lower risks. The conclusions appear appropriately cautious given that the results were derived from retrospective cohort studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the long-term effects of psychosocial programmes in preventing smoking and other drug abuse among adolescents. The authors concluded that there is weak evidence that social influences programmes can prevent or reduce substance use for up to 15 years. The authors' conclusions took account of the quality of the included studies and are likely to be reliable.
Treatment of childhood idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura is still an area of controversy. We reviewed the literature on anti-D treatment. Most studies used intravenous anti-D. Single doses of 50 microg/kg increased the platelet count to >or=20x10(9)/L in 70% of the children within 3 days. Intravenous anti-D seems safe in classic childhood ITP although hemolysis and occasionally renal failure may be of concern. A few studies reported intramuscularly or subcutaneously administered anti-D. Further studies on the optimal dose and route of administration of anti-D are warranted.

CRD SUMMARY: This review compared early and late tracheostomy in patients undergoing prolonged artificial ventilation. The authors concluded that performing a tracheostomy earlier may shorten the duration of artificial ventilation and length of stay in the intensive care unit. The lack of methodological detail, the limited number of studies included in the review, and the clinical and statistical heterogeneity identified, mean that the conclusions and implications for practice may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared techniques for closure of the pancreatic remnant after distal pancreatectomy. The authors concluded that the quality and quantity of data are insufficient to allow firm conclusions on the optimal surgical technique. Despite limitations in the analysis of this review, the authors' cautious conclusion accounts for the quality of the evidence presented and can be considered reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed system changes to counteract the effects of physician work hours, fatigue or sleep deprivation on patient safety outcomes. The authors concluded that the evidence presented was insufficient to inform practice. Their conclusions and recommendations for further research are appropriate given the limitations of the current evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effects of the timing of radiation therapy on survival in limited-stage small-cell lung cancer. The authors concluded that there is evidence that early radiation therapy is beneficial for overall survival when hyperfractionated radiation therapy and/or platinum-based chemotherapy are used. Given the uncertain quality of the included studies, the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This systematic review found a paucity of evidence relating to the management of central venous catheters (CVCs) in paediatric care. The authors concluded that there was inconclusive evidence for the use of prophylactic vancomycin in paediatric patients with CVCs. The authors' limited conclusions reflect the lack of evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found some evidence that some herbal medicine products are associated with serious hepatotoxicity (liver damage). The authors stated that the incidence of events is generally unknown, and in most cases it could not be established that the herbal medicine caused the hepatotoxicity. The evidence presented appears to support the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of adjuvant therapy following surgery for early ovarian cancer. The authors concluded there was no significant difference in survival between chemotherapy and radiotherapy and, that chemotherapy improved survival compared with no treatment. Toxicity and quality of life were not evaluated. Lack of assessment of the differences between included studies limits the strength of this review.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed exercise for improving functioning and psychological well-being in people with cancer during and after medical treatment. The authors concluded that exercise may have benefits, but that the available research is of moderate quality. The conclusions are in line with the evidence presented and appear appropriately cautious.
CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to develop guidelines for radiotherapy in adults with newly diagnosed malignant glioma, and recommended post-operative external beam radiotherapy as standard therapy. However, given the limited study details and the lack of a formal quality assessment, it is not possible to comment on the strength of the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effectiveness of alternative treatments for tinnitus. The authors concluded that hypnotherapy improved some subjective measures. Some of the methods used to conduct the review were not reported and the conclusions were based on evidence from two small, apparently methodologically flawed, studies. Consequently, the evidence was very limited.
Recent work suggests that preoperative skin infiltration with local anesthetic may lead to reduced postoperative pain. We have studied this in a randomised, prospective, double-blind trial of 40 women having cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. After establishment of the spinal block, the incision line was infiltrated in 20 women with 30 ml 0.5% bupivacaine and in 20 with 30 ml normal saline. There was no difference in pain scores between the 2 groups on any of the 3 postoperative days, perhaps due to the high quality analgesia provided by supplemental subarachnoid morphine.

CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the efficacy and side-effects of a single intramuscular injection of systemic corticosteroid for the treatment of hay fever in adults. The authors concluded that systemic corticosteroid therapy is efficient and that there is no evidence of serious side-effects. The reliability of the conclusions are doubtful given the limitations in the search, quality assessment and reporting of the review process.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that exposure to a single course of prenatal corticosteroids administered more than 7 days before birth does not reduce the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome, but can increase the risk of perinatal mortality, earlier birth and maternal infectious morbidity. The review was generally well-conducted and, despite a few methodological considerations, the conclusions are likely to be reliable.
We analyzed the treatment schedule of a long-running HIV/AIDS prevention program in Managua, Nicaragua, that targets sex workers through mass and specific clinic-based treatment of sexually transmitted infections and confirmed the role of frequency of treatment in generating a sustained reduction in measured prevalence of sexually transmitted infections. Unplanned variations in the time between treatments, a situation common to public health programs, provided the basis for attributing changes in measured levels of sexually transmitted infections to the program and for testing the statistical significance of the relationship. This information is critical to program design and funding and to resource allocation.

The authors report the results of a randomized, double-blind multicenter clinical trial on the use of gabexate mesilate vs aprotinin in the therapy of acute pancreatitis. The size of the study sample and the end points chosen for evaluation of the early systemic complications of the pancreatitis--carefully selected targets for reliable assessment of the efficacy of any protease inhibitor--lead to the conclusion that gabexate mesilate is more efficacious than aprotinin in reducing the early complications of necrotizing acute pancreatitis, if administered within 72 h of onset of symptoms. Its good tolerability means that it can be used safely even at the dose of 3 g/24 h.

In a prospective multicenter study, 367 fecal samples from 300 patients with diarrhea were tested for Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) with a new immunochromatography assay for toxins A and B (ICTAB), a real-time PCR on the toxin B gene, and the cell cytotoxicity assay. Twenty-three (6.2%) of the 367 fecal samples were positive by the cell cytotoxicity assay. With the cell cytotoxicity assay as the "gold standard," the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value for the ICTAB assay and real-time PCR were 91, 97, 70, and 99%, and 87, 96, 57 and 99%, respectively. In conclusion, both the ICTAB and the real-time PCR can be implemented as rapid screening methods for patients suspected of having CDAD.

Schistosomiasis caused by infection with Schistosoma mansoni is a serious public health burden in 38 of the 56 districts of Uganda. This article reviews the initial experience of the national control programme. Launched in 2003, this started with a pilot phase with the main aim of utilizing the experience to formulate feasible and appropriate methods of drug delivery. Overall, 432,746 people were treated and coverage was 91.4% in schools and 64.7% in communities. The issues raised by independent evaluators included that most communities did not participate in the selection of community drug distributors (CDD) and that teachers and CDDs needed refresher training mainly on health education and the management of side effects. As a way forward, it is suggested that the Ministry of Health should integrate deworming into the existing health infrastructure so that every time a child is reached for any health service, the child is also de-wormed.

Fifty-two consecutive asymptomatic patients with a total of 166 bypass grafts were investigated by 16-slice computed tomography (CT) 15 +/- 5 days before invasive coronary angiography. Overall, 165 grafts (99.4%) were assessable with multislice CT (MSCT). Coronary angiography showed that 111 grafts (67%) were patent and 54 (33%) were occluded. Of the patent grafts, 22 had high-grade stenoses. MSCT correctly classified 111 grafts as patent and 54 as occluded. Of the patent grafts, 16-slice CT correctly detected 21 bypass stenoses (95%). These results yielded 100% sensitivity and specificity of 16-slice CT for detecting bypass grafts occlusion and 96% sensitivity and 100% specificity for detecting high-grade stenoses in patent grafts.

The author investigated the differences between Jewish Israeli and Arab Israeli teachers in their satisfaction with their work. Initially, the goal of the present study was to investigate whether there were demographic attributes (such as age, gender, and education) that differentiated between the two groups of teachers. Later, the author added two variables, teachers' perceptions of their occupation and teachers' perceptions of their principals' leadership styles, to the analysis to examine their contribution to the level of satisfaction for each group. Regression analyses revealed the significant power of the two added variables in predicting teacher satisfaction among both Jewish and Arab Israeli teachers. The author discussed implications of the findings in relation to principals' roles and teachers' perceptions.

In the etiology of dementia several genetic and various environmental factors are assumed to interact. Most epidemiological studies on risk factors have focused on "constitutional" factors like age, sex, birth order, dementia in the family and "life style" factors like smoking and alcohol consumption. Only few studies have investigated the role of psychosocial factors at work and during leisure time on the risk to develop dementia. Our paper gives a systematic review of all published results of controlled studies about psychosocial risk factors. A positive association has been observed between dementia and living alone, having no close social ties, not participating in social and leisure activities, and never having married. Recent studies have found that Alzheimer's disease in particular is negatively associated with diversity of activities and intensity of intellectual activities and positively associated with psychosocial inactivity, unproductive working style, living with a dominant spouse and with physical inactivity.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of uterine artery Doppler investigation in predicting perinatal outcome of patients with chronic hypertension.
STUDY DESIGN: Uterine artery velocimetry was investigated at 24 weeks gestation in 78 chronic hypertensive pregnant women by means of color Doppler. The resistance index (RI) and the presence of a diastolic notch were recorded and related to the development of superimposed preeclampsia (SPE), pregnancy aggravated hypertension (PAH). and intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR).
RESULTS: There were more pregnancy complications in the 25 patients with abnormal RI, compared with the 53 women with normal RI (SPE 12% vs. 0%, PAH 36% vs. 7% and IUGR 52% vs. 2%; P<0.01), and more in women with a bilateral diastolic notch compared with those without (SPE 23% vs. 0, PAH 54% vs. 4%, IUGR 85% vs. 2%; P<0.0001), while no differences were detected in those with only a unilateral notch, except for PAH (27% vs. 4%; P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry identifies a subgroup of chronic hypertensive patients with a high frequency of pregnancy complications.

A large double-blind, vehicle-controlled study of 143 patients with chronic postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) was performed to evaluate the degree of efficacy of topically applied capsaicin 0.075% cream. In addition, the safety and efficacy of long-term application of topical capsaicin in PHN was assessed by following patients in an open-label study for up to 2 years. In the double-blind phase, 143 patients with PHN of 6 months' duration or longer were enrolled. Since epidemiologic studies of patients who receive no treatment have shown that only 10% to 25% of those with PHN after 1 month will still have pain at 1 year, two separate efficacy analyses were performed: one with all evaluable patients (n = 131) and the other with 93 patients whose PHN lasted for longer than 12 months prior to study startup. All efficacy variables, including the physician's global evaluation of reduction in PHN pain, changes in pain severity on the categoric scale, visual analogue scale for pain severity, visual analogue scale for pain relief, and functional capacity scale, showed significant improvement at nearly all time points throughout the study for both patient groups, based on duration of PHN pain. In contrast, the group receiving vehicle cream remained essentially unchanged. Data from the long-term, open-label phase (up to 2 years, n = 77), which immediately followed the 6-week blinded phase, showed that the clinical benefit in patients treated for a short (6-week) period with topical capsaicin could be maintained or amplified in most patients (86%) during prolonged therapy. There were no serious adverse effects observed or reported throughout the trial; in fact, the only side effect associated with capsaicin treatment was the burning or stinging at local sites of application (in 9% of patients) during exposures of up to 2 years (long-term phase). On the basis of these data, we conclude that capsaicin 0.075% cream is a safe and effective treatment for the pain of postherpetic neuralgia and should be considered for initial management of patients with this condition.
Fortification of wheat flour in 1997 and corn flour in 1999 with folic acid among other micronutrients was implemented in Costa Rica by means of two decrees, resulting in an effective public health impact. A prevalence of 25% of folic acid serum levels deficiency detected in fertile women in 1996 decreased 87% in urban areas two years later, whereas in rural areas diminished by 63%. In addition, a significant reduction of neural tube defects at the national level has been reported, dropping from a rate of 9.7 per 1000 lb during the period 1996-1998 to 6.3 per 1000 lb in the period 1999-2000. Finally, there has been a reported 74% reduction in the number of Neural Tube Defects at Birth (NTB) at the National Children's Hospital, resulting in 105 cases treated in 1995 to 26 cases in 2001.

OBJECTIVE: To review the evidence on the effects of disinfection of environmental surfaces in hospitals (as compared with cleaning without use of disinfectants) on the occurrence of nosocomial infections.
METHODS: Systematic review of experimental and nonexperimental intervention studies dealing with environmental disinfection or cleaning in different health care settings.
RESULTS: A total of 236 scientific articles were identified. None described a meta-analysis, systematic review, or randomized controlled trial. Only 4 articles described completed cohort studies matching the inclusion criteria. None of these studies showed lower infection rates associated with routine disinfection of surfaces (mainly floors) versus cleaning with detergent only.
CONCLUSIONS: Disinfectants may pose a danger to staff, patients, and the environment and require special safety precautions. However, targeted disinfection of certain environmental surfaces is in certain instances an established component of hospital infection control. Given the complex, multifactorial nature of nosocomial infections, well-designed studies that systematically investigate the role of surface disinfection are required.

We conducted a worksite cardiovascular disease (CVD) awareness and education program at a large medical center. The program consisted of employee screening for blood pressure and total serum cholesterol level, dissemination of information on risk factors for CVD, counseling on behavior change, and evaluation of the screening event as an educational tool. During this five-day event, 2,284 employees were screened for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. Consenting employees completed a health risk appraisal survey (n = 2,255) and received counseling on their results and CVD risk factors. Appropriate referrals to health care professionals and educational programs were made according to national guidelines. We developed three-month and six-month follow-up surveys and distributed them to all participating employees. The analysis of these data suggests some positive impact upon behavior change within this employee population. In addition to the two follow-up surveys, we held a second blood pressure and serum cholesterol screening eight months after the initial screening. Comparison of the levels taken from both screenings (n = 234) suggests that worksite screening programs may influence significant serum cholesterol and blood pressure reductions in high-risk employees.

This study estimated the impact of the Citibank Health Management Program on changes in health risks among Citibank employees. McNemar chi-squared tests compared the probability of being at high risk for poor health when the first and last health-risk appraisal surveys were taken. Logistic regression controlled for baseline differences in subsequent analyses when those who participated in more intensive program features were compared with those who participated in less intensive features. Declines in risk were noted for 8 of 10 risk categories. Most changes were small, except those related to exercise habits, seatbelt use, and stress levels. For nine health risk categories, those who participated in more intensive program services were significantly more likely than others to reduce their health risks. Thus, the Citibank Health Management Program was associated with significant reductions in health risk.

These preliminary findings suggest that participation in the account may have modified participant behaviors associated with risk for death from heart attack and lung cancer. Although further research and development is needed before stronger conclusions about the impact of the program can be made, these findings suggest positive effects of participation in an innovative employee-driven health and wellness program.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that pelvic arterial embolisation offered a safe and conservative alternative to surgical intervention for post-partum haemorrhage in women who desired to preserve future fertility. As this did not appear to be a systematic review and the evidence was from retrospective studies and case reports, these conclusions need to be considered with caution.
The purpose of this study was to compare the well-being, salivary cotinine levels and environmental characteristics of office building workers and their workplace before and after the introduction of a smoking ban. The results showed that one year following the ban, there was an ambiguous change in symptom reporting, a trend towards reduced salivary cotinine levels, and an improvement in measured but not in perceived environmental quality.

This article examines the impact of the World Bank's Safe Motherhood Project (SMP) on health outcomes for Indonesia's poor. Provincial data from 1990 to 2005 was analyzed combining a difference-in-differences approach in multivariate regression analysis with matching of intervention (SMP) and control group provinces and adjusting for possible confounders. Our results indicated that, after taking into account the impact of two other concurrent development projects, SMP was statistically significantly associated with a net beneficial change in under-five mortality, but not with infant mortality, total fertility rate, teenage pregnancy, unmet contraceptive need or percentage of deliveries overseen by trained health personnel. Unemployment and the pupil-teacher ratio were statistically significantly associated with infant mortality and percentage deliveries overseen by trained personnel, while pupil-teacher ratio and female education level were statistically significantly associated with under-five mortality. Clinically relevant changes (52-68% increase in the percentage of deliveries overseen by trained personnel, 25-33% decrease in infant mortality rate, and 8-14% decrease in under-five mortality rate) were found in both the intervention (SMP) and control groups.

CRD SUMMARY: This narrative review of the effectiveness of topical negative pressure in the treatment of pressure ulcers concluded that topical negative pressure was not proven to be more effective than other interventions. The reliability of these conclusions is limited by the small size of included studies and the lack of information on participants, outcomes, study selection and data extraction.
The effect of early initiation of auranofin (AF) therapy on outcome measures was studied in a controlled 24-month double blind trial in 138 patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using an intent to treat approach. Patients were randomized to AF or placebo but in case of insufficient effect or intolerable adverse events, they switched to open disease modifying antirheumatic drug therapy. Patients who started AF fared significantly better in improved joint swelling. Stanford Health Assessment Questionnaire index, Keitel functional test, and mental depression, and furthermore, radiologic progression was significantly retarded. Our results support a disease modifying beneficial effect of AF in early active RA.se
This double-blind multicenter study compares the effect of adding auranofin (AF) 3 mg bid or placebo to patients already taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs for rheumatoid arthritis. The 242 patients who completed 3 months of therapy demonstrated that the group receiving AF responded better than those receiving placebo. Of the 144 patients who completed 6 months coded medication, the efficacy in the AF group was superior to the placebo group in several parameters including a reduction in the number of painful or swollen joints, grip strength, dropout rate, and global efficacy as judged by the evaluating physician. A significant lowering of the Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate and immunoglobulin levels was noted in the AF treated patients. This study includes data summarizing the difference between both groups with respect to on-therapy conditions and toxicity.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review concluded that corticosteroids are associated with a reduced risk of unsatisfactory recovery in Bell palsy. Also, there may be an additional benefit associated with the use of antiviral agents combined with corticosteroid treatment. These conclusions are likely to be reliable.
A retrospective review of 262 consecutive cervical spine fractures revealed that 41 (16%) were odontoid fractures. Twenty patients were younger than 40 years of age (19 fractures were the result of a motor vehicle accident), whereas 19 fractures occurred in subjects older than 60 (13 were the result of a fall). Fractures were of the Anderson-D'Alonzo Types I (one patient), II (19 patients), and III (21 patients). Significant displacement was present in 31 patients. Anterior and posterior displacement occurred equally, but most of the anterior fractures were seen in patients younger than 40, and the majority of the posterior fractures occurred in those older than 60. Primary fusion was performed in 12 cases. Conservative management was used in 26. Three patients died (one from a spinal cord transection and two from other injuries). In the conservatively treated group, the average time to healing was 12 weeks, but the overall nonunion rate was nine out of 26 (7/13 Type II, 2/13 Type III fractures). The halothoracic jacket was poorly tolerated in patients older than 75 years of age. If daily supervision is not possible, early C1-2 fusion or treatment in an appropriate brace seems superior in the elderly patient.

OBJECTIVE: To ascertain whether a written information sheet is acceptable to patients and improves recall of the consent interview.
DESIGN: Prospective randomised controlled study using questionnaires, comparing a group of patients given information in a written sheet with appropriate explanation to a group given verbal information alone.
SETTING: A specialist orthopaedic surgery unit.
PATIENTS: The test group was 126 patients undergoing revision or primary total hip arthroplasty; 65 patients were given information verbally, 61 patients were given written information.
OUTCOME MEASURE: Patients' recall of information given, tested with a questionnaire completed on admission (mean of 18 days later).
RESULTS: The patients receiving written information scored significantly higher (48% correct answers) than the patients receiving verbal information (38% correct answers).
CONCLUSIONS: Written information sheets contribute to the process of informed consent. As patients' recall of information is generally poor, the sheets may also be useful medicolegally, as a permanent record of what was discussed.

The desirability of obtaining written informed consent for low-risk radiologic procedures has been the subject of controversy. A group of 80 patients was studied to evaluate the effect of informed consent for excretory urograms on: (1) incidence of contrast reactions; (2) discomfort during the procedure; (3) level of patients' anxiety before and after the procedure; (4) patients' perception of the procedure; and (5) desirability of informed consent from the patients' viewpoint. Results revealed no statistically significant difference between the 2 groups in the incidence of reactions, discomfort, perception of the examination, or anxiety level prior to the procedure. The informed consent group had a statistically greater factual knowledge of the procedure evaluated objectively (P less than 0.01). Of the patients who received the written consent form, 83% regarded it as helpful and none viewed it as harmful or refused the examination. In the control group, 32% desired more information.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found that use of mobile phones may be effective in augmenting interventions for smoking cessation but there was little evidence of effectiveness for patients with anxiety disorders. The limited search, potential for language and publication biases and the lack of information provided in the results mean that the reliability of the authors' conclusions are unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that there was insufficient evidence that home monitoring of infants can reduce the incidence of sudden infant death syndrome. Reporting flaws mean that the results should be interpreted with some caution but the authors' conclusions on the paucity of good quality evidence are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that lifestyle interventions modelled on the US Diabetes Prevention Program produced a clinically significant weight loss in adults at high risk of diabetes. Using lay personnel could reduce costs without sacrificing effectiveness. The review process was effective, but the studies were of limited quality and the authors' conclusions should be treated with caution.
In addition to establishing a non-punitive environment for reporting errors, and analyzing the root causes of errors, The Valley Hospital volunteered to be a beta test site for a barcode specimen management technology. As a result of implementing this positive patient and specimen identification system, the hospital has reduced its patient and specimen misidentification errors by 77 percent in the last year.

The metabolic effect of 3-week dietary supplementation with a fish oil concentrate was examined in not markedly obese, not hypertriglyceridemic men with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) treated with hypoglycemic agents. Ten patients were given 15 ml/d of fish oil (Martens Oil, Norway) equivalent to 3.1 g of n-3 fatty acid (FA) per day, and compared to 10 diabetics treated with placebo (15 ml/d saline). While fish oil leads to expected increase in the ratio of n-3 to n-6 FA intake, it does not alter fasting and mixed meal stimulated blood glucose, plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations. There were no changes in insulin action estimated by the metabolic clearance rates of glucose at plasma insulin levels of about 100 microU/ml and 1400 microU/ml during hyperinsulinemic isoglycemic clamp, and no changes were seen in insulin binding to erythrocytes. Even though our short-term study does not warrant authoritative conclusions, no adverse effects of low-dose fish oil on glucose homeostasis have been found in not markedly obese NIDDM patients treated with oral hypoglycemics.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that the use of early anticoagulation in patients with acute ischaemic cardioembolic stroke to prevent early recurrence or to improve functional outcome is not supported by the evidence. This was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
Intracervical application of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) gel has shown to be an effective method for pre-induction cervical ripening in pregnant women with an unripe uterine cervix. Side effects are minimal, provided that the instillation is carefully restricted to the cervical canal. This requires--apart from a proper technique--an optimal gel formulation. For this reason a newly developed highly viscous PGE2 gel was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre trial. Within a 9-h study period, successful cervical ripening (increase in Bishop score to 6 or more) was achieved in 39 (56%) of the 70 patients in the PGE2 groups and in 23 (34%) of the 68% patients in the placebo group (P = 0.04). During the first 12 h after gel application, 25 (35%) of the women in the PGE2 group and 2 (3%) in the placebo group had a spontaneous delivery. No serious adverse reactions were observed. The data suggest that the use of this highly viscous PGE2 gel may be advantageous if strictly intracervical application is the primary objective.

The aim of our study was to evaluate the best method for cervical ripening before a classical induction with amniotomy and oxytocin. One hundred term pregnant patients who presented an unfavorable cervix and an indication for the induction of labor were assigned randomly to either 0.5 mg prostaglandin (PG) E2 gel intracervically (N = 52) or 3 mg PGE2 gel intravaginally (N = 48). The intravaginal gel had a greater effect on cervical ripening according to a modification of the Bishop score than did intracervical gel, but it had a higher incidence of side effects.

Two hundred smokers who were judged by their general practitioner to be motivated to stop smoking were allocated to one of two groups. All were offered an initial appointment at which they were advised to stop smoking and offered nicotine gum. One group then received no further appointments. The other was offered four further appointments over three months. Both groups were followed up at six and 12 months. At one year follow up 15.5% overall had stopped smoking, 14% in the low and 17% in the high contact group. This is better than most results so far reported for nicotine chewing gum in general practice, suggesting that general practitioners can use it to good effect. We compare this result with others achieved in general practice.

We evaluated the role of antimicrobials in the treatment of chronic maxillary sinusitis in children with respiratory allergy. Night and day cough, nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, postnasal seen. Eighty-four children were treated in a double-blind manner with either amoxicillin, erythromycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or an antihistamine decongestant (carbinoxamine maleate-pseudoephedrine HCl). Radiographic and clinical responses were best with amoxicillin, but trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was an adequate alternative. This study demonstrates that allergic children with chronic sinusitis with associated chronic respiratory symptoms are likely to respond clinically and radiologically with antimicrobial treatment.

Twenty-one children with mite-sensitive asthma took part in a crossover randomised controlled trial of mite-free bedding. Each child was issued with a new sleeping bag and pillow for a month, and twice-daily peak flow readings were compared with those obtained during a month in the child's ordinary bedding. Seventeen of the children had higher mean peak flow readings during the period in the mite-free bedding (p < 0.01). The overall improvement was only modest, however, and some mites had appeared in most of the bedding by the end of the trial. New bedding may be helpful to patients with mite-sensitive asthma, but methods are needed to prevent colonisation by mites.

We initiated a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to test the efficacy and safety of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) (L-leucine 12 g, L-isoleucine 6 g, and L-valine 6 g daily) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients. There was an excess mortality in subjects randomized to active treatment (24 BCAA, 13 placebo) when a total of 126 ALS patients had been recruited. This finding, associated with the lack of efficacy of BCAA (measured by comparing the disability scales in the two treatment groups), led the Data Monitoring Committee to require cessation of the trial.

The authors studied the effect of transcranial ultrasound on patients with acute middle cerebral artery occlusion and contraindications for thrombolysis. Fifteen consecutive subjects were randomized for insonation over 1 hour or for inclusion in a control group. By day 4, recanalization and neurologic improvement occurred more frequently in the target group. Ultrasound-induced acceleration of clot dissolution may be an option for patients with contraindications for recombinant tissue plasminogen activator.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of Indian version to convert fetuses from breech to vertex presentation was evaluated.
METHODS: One hundred and nine pregnant women presenting between 30 and 32 weeks of gestation with singleton breech infants were included in our prospective randomized open study making an interim analysis recruitment to estimate the sample sizes after one year. The spontaneous version rate of fetuses in breech presentation was compared with the version rate in women performing Indian version. Indian version is a maternal positioning exercise that consists of raising the pelvis, abduction of the thighs, and relaxed abdominal breathing. Clinical parameters that could influence the result were assessed.
RESULTS: In primiparous women, the version rate was 70% in the Indian version group and 63% in the comparison group. In multiparous women, 89% Indian versions and 87% spontaneous versions were observed. Parity was the only clinical parameter found to be related to outcome.
CONCLUSION: Indian version does not significantly improve the rate of spontaneous version of breech to vertex presentation.

BACKGROUND: Epidural analgesia is the most effective labour pain relief but is associated with increased rates of instrumental vaginal delivery and other effects, which might be related to the poor motor function associated with traditional epidural. New techniques that preserve motor function could reduce obstetric intervention. We did a randomised controlled trial to compare low-dose combined spinal epidural and low-dose infusion (mobile) techniques with traditional epidural technique.
METHODS: Between Feb 1, 1999, and April 30, 2000, we randomly assigned 1054 nulliparous women requesting epidural pain relief to traditional (n=353), low-dose combined spinal epidural (n=351), or low-dose infusion epidural (n=350). Primary outcome was mode of delivery, and secondary outcomes were progress of labour, efficacy of procedure, and effect on neonates. We obtained data during labour and interviewed women postnatally.
FINDINGS: The normal vaginal delivery rate was 35.1% in the traditional epidural group, 42.7% in the low-dose combined spinal group (odds ratio 1.38 [95% CI 1.01-1.89]; p=0.04); and 42.9% in the low-dose infusion group (1.39 [1.01-1.90]; p=0.04). These differences were accounted for by a reduction in instrumental vaginal delivery. Overall, 5 min APGAR scores of 7 or less were more frequent with low-dose technique. High-level resuscitation was more frequent in the low-dose infusion group.
INTERPRETATION: The use of low-dose epidural techniques for labour analgesia has benefits for delivery outcome. Continued routine use of traditional epidurals might not be justified.

Forty-four appropriately grown preterm infants of birthweight 1-1.5 kg were allocated to nasojejunal (NJ) or nasogastric (NG) feeding at birth. Infants in the NJ group were transferred to NG feeding as soon as they weighed 1.5 kg. The mean caloric intake of infants in both groups was the same, but mean incremental weight velocity during NJ feeding was significantly less than during NG feeding. At expected date of delivery mean body weight and mean occipitofrontal circumference were significantly smaller in the NJ group. During the 3 months after the expected date of delivery, when all infants were being fed orally, the infants in the NJ group had significantly greater mean weight velocity and mean occipitofrontal circumference velocity than infants in the NG group so that by 3 months after the expected date of delivery there was no significant difference in bodyweight or occipitofrontal circumference between the groups. Low birthweight infants fed by the nasojejunal route from birth should be transferred to nasogastric feeding as soon as possible.

In a randomized trial, treatment of urethral stricture by direct visual internal urethrotomy with 3 days of postoperative catheterisation was found to be sufficient, given minimal complications, and had a cure rate of 85% after 6 months and 80% after 1 year follow-up. The postoperative follow-up should not include urethrography, but patient's statement and maximal urinary flow rate might be adequate.

Seven 24-hour ECG recordings and blood samples were taken within 3 weeks in 42 patients who had suffered an acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Ca, K and Mg concentrations in serum, and K and Mg in the erythrocytes, were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy. One half of the patients were infused with 81 mval/day MgSO4 for 3 days. In patients who exhibited intense electrolyte alterations 10-20 days after AMI, there was a significantly higher rate in the frequency of couplets and/or tachycardia in the 2- to 20-day period after AMI. In patients infused with MgSO4, the fluctuation in serum electrolytes and the rate of arrhythmias were significantly reduced.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that evidence does not support the use of furosemide in common practice as the primary treatment of hypercalcaemia of any cause.  Given several limitations with the included studies and review, including small sample size, indirect treatment comparisons and potential bias, and the paucity of current evidence, the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with extreme caution.  
The traditional role of gastric emptying as the initial step in the management of the poisoned patient has recently been questioned; immediate activated charcoal administration has been recommended by some. In the setting of acetaminophen overdose, ipecac-induced emesis may interfere with subsequent oral antidotal therapy. Therefore, we conducted a study to compare the efficacy of initial therapy with ipecac with therapy with activated charcoal-cathartic in a simulated acetaminophen overdosage. Ten healthy volunteers participated in a randomized, crossover trial. Subjects ingested 3.0 g acetaminophen, followed by either no intervention, 30 mL syrup of ipecac, or 50 g activated charcoal-sorbitol solution at one hour. Serial acetaminophen levels were determined at intervals over eight hours. Both interventions significantly reduced the area under the curve compared with control (P less than .05). When comparing ipecac with activated charcoal-cathartic, no significant difference was noted among these groups.

Twenty-five out-patients with chronic neck pain participated in a prospective, randomized trial of acupuncture versus placebo transcutaneous nerve stimulation. A single-blind, non-cross-over design incorporated several outcome measures in an attempt to determine any particular facet of pain that responded to acupuncture. No significant difference between the two treatments was found either post-treatment or at follow-up. Whilst the small population studied limits the conclusions that may be drawn, these findings suggest that acupuncture may have no greater effect than that of a powerful placebo.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) had a superior sensitivity for myeloma bone lesions compared with whole body X-ray, and that response monitoring with FDG-PET computed tomography during treatment was promising. Given the limitations of the review and the included studies, the conclusions seem overly strong.
Thirty-nine sarcoidosis patients with pulmonary infiltrations (stage II) of less than 5 years duration and not treated earlier with corticosteroids were randomly allocated for treatment with methylprednisolone for 7 months or for observation without therapy. Every other treated patient was given the drugs daily and every other followed an alternate-day regimen. After 7 months the chest radiographic finding, the forced vital capacity and the diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide were superior in the treated group. There was no difference between the two drug regimens. After 24 and 48 months no statistically significant differences between the untreated and the treated groups were found.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a chronic anxiety disorder, associated with comorbidity and impairment in quality of life, for which improved psychosocial treatments are needed. GAD is also associated with reactivity to and avoidance of internal experiences. The current study examined the efficacy of an acceptance-based behavioral therapy aimed at increasing acceptance of internal experiences and encouraging action in valued domains for GAD. Clients were randomly assigned to immediate (n = 15) or delayed (n = 16) treatment. Acceptance-based behavior therapy led to statistically significant reductions in clinician-rated and self-reported GAD symptoms that were maintained at 3- and 9-month follow-up assessments; significant reductions in depressive symptoms were also observed. At posttreatment assessment 78% of treated participants no longer met criteria for GAD and 77% achieved high end-state functioning; these proportions stayed constant or increased over time. As predicted, treatment was associated with decreases in experiential avoidance and increases in mindfulness.

Beneficial effects of intranasal beclomethasone dipropionate (Bdp) in patients with nasal polyposis have been reported earlier. This study was carried out to investigate whether long-term treatment with Bdp after polypectomy could prevent formation of new polyps and reduce the number of surgical removals. Forty consecutive patients without laboratory or other clinical signs of allergy but with severe nasal polyposis were included in the study. Twenty patients were treated with intranasal Bdp and twenty patients received no treatment after polypectomy. All patients were followed for at least 2.5 years. The size of the polyps that recurred was estimated at different time-intervals by the examining doctor. After six months there was already a significant difference in favour of the group treated with intranasal Bdp. Further results of the study and the clinical implications are discussed.

The study reports the impact of a computer-based drug profile upon physicians' drug order recording behaviors. The drug profile system, including information about both drugs ordered and prescriptions received, was implemented for a randomly selected group of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan members during 1973. The monthly updated profile was made readily accessible to physicians. Drug order notations entered by physicians on outpatient medical records were examined to determine if the availability of the profile influenced the completeness of drug-related data being recorded by physicians. Using an experimental design, the results indicated the availability of the profile did not influence the completeness of drug-related data recorded. Also, observation of the data generated for analysis suggests caution in assuming drug notations or prescriptions reflect complete and reliable drug use data.

A controlled trial comparing family therapy with individual supportive therapy in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa was undertaken. Eighty patients (57 with anorexia nervosa; 23 with bulimia nervosa) were first admitted to a specialized unit to restore their weight to normal. Before discharge, they were randomly allocated to family therapy or the control treatment (individual supportive therapy). After one year of psychological treatment, they were reassessed, using body weight, menstrual function, and ratings on the Morgan and Russell scales. Family therapy was found to be more effective than individual therapy in patients whose illness was not chronic and had begun before the age of 19 years. A more tentative finding was the greater value of individual supportive therapy in older patients. To our knowledge, this is the first controlled trial of family therapy in anorexia nervosa and clarifies the specific indications for this treatment.
To surmount the economic pressures of managed care, specialists are pursuing various initiatives designed to increase revenues and market share that may put them into competition with healthcare systems. Systems contemplating collaboration with specialists to gain their loyalty may first consider employing a strategy involving physician gain sharing. It should be understood, however, that there are legal hurdles to be overcome in developing gain sharing, that there are different gain-sharing models to be used, and that there are limitations as well as benefits to such an initiative. These limitations require healthcare systems to consider other, more durable specialist integration strategies. The balance of power between a healthcare system and specialists will affect the success of whatever integration strategy is employed.

This study uses a nationally representative sample of nursing homes and nursing home residents to examine the effect of Medicaid reimbursement on quality of care. The analysis shows that both reimbursement approach and level affect nursing home quality, as measured by case-mix adjusted staff to resident ratios. The analysis also shows that staffing ratios have a significant impact on resident outcomes, and these impacts vary by professional category of staff. Reimbursement does not have a significant impact on outcomes, however.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the level of nonadherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and to explore the association of factors militating against adherence and nonadherence to therapy among people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) at an Antiretroviral Clinic in Ibadan, Nigeria.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional survey was employed to determine the prevalence of nonadherence.
METHODOLOGY: A structured interviewer-administered questionnaire was applied to consecutive PLWHA who had been on therapy for a minimum of three months. The completed questionnaires were entered into a computer and analyzed. Multivariate logistic regression was used to determine factors associated with nonadherence.
RESULTS: Three hundred and eighteen people living with HIV/AIDS completed the questionnaire. Their mean age was 39.1+/-9.6 years. There were 173 (54.4%) females and 145 (45.6%) males. The median duration on HAART was 19 months (Range 3 to 28 months) and the prevalence of nonadherence was 118 (37.1%) using the less than 95% adherence profile. About a third (31.5%) of those missing therapy reportedly missed their medication because of fasting. Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that patients who felt healthy or simply forgot to take their drugs and those not willing to disclose their HIV status were independently, significantly associated with less than 95% adherence.
CONCLUSION: The study showed that nonadherence to HAART is a problem in the ARV clinic and that the feeling of being healthy, forgetfulness, and unwillingness to disclose HIV status by PLWHA were significant barriers to adherence. Efforts to improve adherence in the clinic will have to address these issues among others.

In a double-blind study in general practice, both mianserin ('Bolvidon') in an average dose of 40 mg a day, and imipramine, in an average dose of 100 mg a day, were found to be significantly more effective than placebo after two to three weeks' treatment. No significant differences in antidepressant effect could be demonstrated between mianserin and imipramine. There was no significant difference in side-effects between the three treatments.

This study investigated whether the effective mass media-led antismoking campaigns in Australia had the traditional differential effect across educational levels. Our population surveys included random samples of 12,851 people before the campaign and 11,609 several years after the campaign had started. No statistically significant differences were found in quitting across education levels in three of the four subgroups. Mass media-led antismoking campaigns may play an important role in getting the antismoking message to the less educated.

Back-up of elderly patients in hospital awaiting long-term placement has become a major problem in some areas of the United States and elsewhere. In 1982, geriatric consultation teams (physician, nurse, and social worker) were introduced into six acute hospitals in Monroe County, New York, to help alleviate the problem through more attention to restoration of patient function and comprehensive discharge planning. Over a six-month period, 4,328 newly hospitalized patients aged 70 or older were screened, and geriatric consultations were provided for 366 (8.5 per cent) who were judged to be at risk of requiring prolonged hospital stays. During this period, the mean monthly census of elderly patients backed up in hospital declined 21 per cent, a reversal of previous rises that could not be explained by any other identifiable factors. The impact was on length of stay on back-up status rather than rate of entry to that status. A variety of medical, rehabilitative, and social interventions accounted for this outcome. A number of health care system barriers to expeditious rehabilitation and discharge of hospitalized elderly patients were identified. Geriatric consultation was deemed useful for implementation in acute hospitals in other settings.

In a double-blind, double-dummy randomized controlled clinical trial, the onset and duration of the analgesic effect of dipyrone, 1 or 2 g, and diclofenac sodium, 75 mg, by either the i.m. or the i.v. route were compared in 293 patients (aged 18-70 years) with acute renal colic. A level of > or = 50 mm on the 100-mm visual analogue scale was required for inclusion in the study. Patients were randomly allocated to six treatment groups, receiving dipyrone 1 g i.m., dipyrone 1 g i.v., dipyrone 2 g i.m.;, dipyrone 2 g i.v., diclofenac sodium 75 mg i.m.; and diclofenac sodium 75 mg i.v., respectively. Evaluations were performed at 10, 20, 30, and 60 min and 2, 4, and 6 h after treatment (time 0). Primary efficacy end points included course of pain, total pain, percentage of patients with a pain improvement of 50% or more at each evaluation time, pain intensity evaluated by the investigator on a 0-3 scale, and differences in pain intensity. The analgesic response was more marked and prolonged among patients receiving dipyrone 2 g i.m. or dipyrone 2 g i.v. There were no significant differences between dipyrone 1 g and diclofenac sodium 75 mg, by either the i.m. or the i.v. route. All treatment regimens were well tolerated.

A randomized controlled trial was carried out to test the hypothesis that a schedule of home interventions among mothers of low socioeconomic status would bring about environmental changes in the home, changes that could enhance mother-child interaction The experimental group (N = 21) received three prenatal and five postnatal visits for each visit, specific objectives were determined The control group (N = 26) received the routine postnatal visit The HOME inventory was used as the response measure Although the global HOME score was higher in the experimental group the difference did not reach statistical significance Reasons for the negative results in this study and in similar ones are discussed.
OBJECTIVES: This study assessed smokers' reactions to a 25 cents cigarette tax imposed in Massachusetts.
METHODS: A statewide telephone survey of 1783 adult smokers and 216 teenaged smokers was conducted.
RESULTS: Among adult smokers, 3.5% reported that they had stopped smoking, owing in part to the price increase; 35% had considered quitting and 19% had attempted to cut the cost of smoking by switching to cheaper brands or cutting down. Among teenagers, 21% had considered quitting and 26% had cut costs. Low-income smokers were more responsive to the price increase than more affluent smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: A modest and temporary price increase promoted quitting among adult smokers and reduced cigarette consumption among low-income teenagers.

OBJECTIVES: Growing literature suggests that a significant proportion of rehospitalizations could be prevented if systems were put in place aimed at identifying and addressing some of the underlying issues that cause them. This article highlights key risk factors for unplanned rehospitalizations and illustrates a project that has successfully addressed many of the underlying issues that contribute to them.
PRIMARY PRACTICE SETTING(S): The study illustrated herein took place at an inner-city academic teaching hospital.
FINDINGS/CONCLUSIONS: Proactively identifying patient-, clinician-, and system-associated barriers to successful discharge transitions is critical for effective transitions of care for patients leaving the hospital setting. This process represents a culture change, requires a multidisciplinary approach to care, and mandates clear delineation of roles and responsibilities in the process, with ultimate and clear process ownership being defined. With such steps in place in a system of care, it is reasonable to expect a reduction in preventable rehospitalizations.

College students are engaging in high rates of behavior related to risk of infection from Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). A cognitive-behavioral skills training program for heterosexual college females focused on sexual assertiveness skills and the reduction of risk-related behaviors was designed and evaluated compared with an education-only program. Participants completed pre-intervention, post-intervention, and one-month follow-up assessments of: (a) HIV/STD-related knowledge and beliefs; (b) sexual, alcohol, and drug-related behaviors; and (c) sexual assertiveness role-plays. Skills training participants compared to education-only participants scored higher on sexual assertiveness skills, specific knowledge of HIV infection, and self-efficacy to perform lower risk sexual behaviors and reported a reduction in risk-related behaviors at post-intervention and follow-up assessments. The effectiveness of behavioral skills in HIV risk-reduction programs for college students is discussed.

The present study evaluated the effectiveness of the Positive Parenting Program (Triple P) with a sample of Chinese parents of children with early onset conduct-related problems in Hong Kong. The participants consisted of 91 parents whose children attended maternal and child health centers and child assessment centers for service, and were between three to seven years old. Participants were randomly assigned to the intervention (TP) and a waitlist control group (WL). There was no significant difference in pre-intervention measures between the two groups. However, at post intervention, participants in the TP group reported significantly lower levels of child behavior problems, lower dysfunctional parenting styles, and higher parent sense of competence, compared to the WL group. Implications of these findings for the use of Triple P with families of Chinese descent are discussed.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate a particular burnout risk reduction method among family physicians within a family practice residency program and to contribute to the very limited research literature on family physician residents' stress reduction. The author used the Respiratory One Method (ROM) as a burnout risk reduction method. This study used a quasi-experimental design to compare participating physicians with a control group. To test the research hypothesis that ROM has an effect on emotional exhaustion (EE), the data were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U test. The results revealed that the ROM treatment did have an effect on emotional exhaustion scores. Findings of this study are useful for burnout prevention and curriculum development among family physicians caring for patients in family practice programs.

This study examined the effectiveness of a combined counseling and case management behavioral intervention, using motivational interviewing strategies, in engaging Hispanic injection drug users in treatment and reducing drug use and injection-related HIV risk behaviors. Follow up data are presented on 440 (79.0%) of 557 randomized participants, 6 months after the initial interview. Subjects in the experimental arm were significantly less likely to continue drug injection independent of entering drug treatment, and were also more likely to enter drug treatment. Subjects in both arms who entered drug treatment were less likely to continue drug injection. Among subjects who continued drug injection, those in the experimental arm were significantly less likely to share needles. Confirming the outcomes of this study in other Hispanic sites and populations could be a critical step towards reducing factors that contribute to the self-sustaining HIV/AIDS epidemic in Puerto Rico and communities in the U.S. mainland.
Specific psychological treatments of proven effectiveness for moderate anxiety disorders are not often easily accessible in general practice. In this study, selected patients were supported in learning skills to manage their symptoms. This approach was efficient, acceptable, and led to clinically significant symptom reduction for a high proportion of patients. This improvement was well sustained at three-month follow-up.

The paper describes a method to evaluate patient care. The technique is based on the staging concept. Its basic premise is that the seriousness of a patient's condition at some point in the treatment process is a good indicator of the outcome of the previous parts of the process. Data were collected for 5,000 patients who had been admitted to a sample of hospitals in two California cities with a primary diagnosis matching one of the diseases for which staging criteria had been developed. The results indicate that the staging technique can be used to distinguish between the outcomes of ambulatory care received by different population groups.

The effects of Red Bull Energy Drink, which includes taurine, glucuronolactone, and caffeine amongst the ingredients, were examined over 3 studies in a total of 36 volunteers. Assessments included psychomotor performance (reaction time, concentration, memory), subjective alertness and physical endurance. When compared with control drinks, Red Bull Energy Drink significantly (P < 0.05) improved aerobic endurance (maintaining 65-75% max. heart rate) and anaerobic performance (maintaining max. speed) on cycle ergometers. Significant improvements in mental performance included choice reaction time, concentration (number cancellation) and memory (immediate recall), which reflected increased subjective alertness. These consistent and wide ranging improvements in performance are interpreted as reflecting the effects of the combination of ingredients.

This study will provide data on the immune response and safety of GSK Biologicals' HRV liquid vaccine when given along with the routine infant immunizations in Philippines.
Infertile women with PCO have been treated with exogenous gonadotrophins (hMG/hCG) for ovulation induction either with or without LHRH-agonist treatment. Those treated without LHRH-agonist-induced LH suppression showed PL in greater than 30% of the cycles and this problem was eliminated by LHRH-agonist therapy. The pregnancy rate (approximately 80% of patients) during the combined therapy was approximately twice that of the group treated with hMG/hCG alone. The suppression of endogenous LH by the LHRH-agonist appeared to have no effect upon the profiles of follicular development in response to hMG, and a high rate of follicle recruitment characterized all PCO treatment cycles irrespective of circulating LH concentrations. These results suggest that LH suppression improves the efficacy of ovulation induction but has no influence on the primary metabolic disturbance in the PCO syndrome.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that there was preliminary evidence to support cognitive remediation to improve short-term cognitive functioning in patients with schizoaffective and affective disorders. This cautious conclusion seems to be appropriate, but the reliability of the review may be affected by some weaknesses in the methods.
Assertive case management models have been used successfully in both social work and mental health settings and, most recently, in the substance abuse field. This article reports on the application of an assertive case management model with drug-involved parolees in Delaware. Because of a variety of factors, the evaluation proved to be less than an ideal test of the effectiveness of the case management approach. Although there were some modest effects on reducing relapse to drug use, it appears that assertive case management is of limited value for clients who are not merely unable to access services, but who are often quite assertive in their unwillingness to make use of these services.

This study evaluates two AIDS risk-reduction interventions targeted at homosexual and bisexual men. Participants were randomized into two peer-led interventions: both involved a lecture on 'safer sex', and one provided a skills-training component during which men could discuss and rehearse the negotiation of safer sexual encounters. Follow-up data collection assessed self-reported changes in sexual behavior at 6 and 12 months. Skills training increased condom use for insertive anal intercourse. In sessions providing skills training, condom use increased, on average, by 44% between pre-test and second follow-up compared with only 11% on average in sessions which did not provide such training.
The objective of this study was to identify the sociocultural and economic factors that act as barriers to women's use of antenatal care services and hospital delivery in a rural community in Kano State, Northern Nigeria. The study was based on an interview of 107 pregnant women conducted by a trained midwife in the native language of the area. Findings indicate that the majority of women (88%) (CI = 81.8-94.2%) in the study area did not attend for antenatal care, and 96.3% (CI = 93.0-99.8%) had delivered or plan to deliver at home without a skilled attendant. Major barriers identified were economic, cultural and those related to the women's perception of their condition. The study recommends that poverty reduction and economic empowerment of rural women are prerequisites for any tangible improvement in the utilisation of antenatal care and obstetric delivery services.

A randomized controlled trial was conducted to evaluate the impact of an automated telephone intervention on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. One hundred twenty participants were randomly assigned to a treatment group that received a daily, automated telephone message regarding diabetes or to a control group that received usual care. The treatment group demonstrated a significant improvement in the frequency of self-monitoring of blood glucose levels compared with the control group (P < .001). A favorable trend in positive attitudes toward diabetes and a reduction in perceived monitoring and exercise barriers were seen in the intervention group compared with the control group.

We prospectively studied the incidence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the thigh in 117 patients having posterior lumbar spinal fusion with instrumentation and bone grafting for degenerative disk disease or spondylolisthesis. Patients with neoplasm, infection, trauma, or history of DVT were excluded. Patients were randomized into two groups. In the operating room, group 1 patients were placed in thigh-high antiembolic compression stockings (TED hose), and group 2 patients were placed in antiembolic stockings and pneumatic compression stockings. In both groups, the stockings were used until discharge. Postoperatively, patients in both groups received 600 mg buffered aspirin twice daily. Comparative analysis of the two groups showed no difference in operative time, blood loss, number of levels of lumbar vertebrae fused, time to mobilization, weight, age, or sex. All patients had duplex scanning of the thigh postoperatively. No patient in the series was observed to have acute DVT by clinical examination or by ultrasonography.
In a randomized trial of neurosurgical patients, groups wearing graduated compression stockings alone (group 1) or graduated compression stockings plus intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) (group 2) were compared with an untreated control group in the prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). In both active treatment groups, the graduated compression stockings were continued for 14 days or until hospital discharge, if earlier. In group 2, IPC was continued for seven days. All patients underwent DVT surveillance with iodine 125-labeled fibrinogen leg scanning and impedance plethysmography. Venography was carried out if either test became abnormal. Deep vein thrombosis occurred in seven (8.8%) of 80 patients in group 1, in seven (9.0%) of 78 patients in group 2, and in 16 (19.8%) of 81 patients in the control group. The observed differences among these rates are statistically significant. The results of this study indicate that graduated compression stockings alone or in combination with IPC are effective methods of preventing DVT in neurosurgical patients.
We have evaluated the incidence of bleeding complications using miniheparin (2 X 2500 IU daily)-dihydroergotamine starting preoperatively in a randomized, controlled, prospective, double-blind study in 50 patients undergoing herniated lumbar disc operations. There was no difference in the incidence of intraoperative bleeding problems between the two groups. Preoperatively, 13 patients have been treated in another hospital with conventional low-dose heparin, and of these 13 patients, 7 developed bleeding complications. There were two deep wound hematomas in the placebo group. Early removal of stitches or operative revision of the wound was not necessary in either group. We conclude that the use of minidose heparin-dihydroergotamine is feasible for the prevention of thromboembolic complications in patients undergoing herniated lumbar disc operations, since an increased incidence of bleeding complications was not observed. This preventive method should therefore be further clinically evaluated.
This double-blind, randomised, multicentre trial in 513 patients having elective surgery for intra-abdominal or intrathoracic malignancy compared the efficacy and safety of venous thrombosis (VT) prophylaxis using 750 anti-factor Xa units of Orgaran (a mixture of low molecular weight heparinoids) given subcutaneously (sc) twice-daily with that of twice-daily injections of 5,000 units standard heparin. The main study endpoints were the development of postoperative VT detected by 125I-fibrinogen leg scanning, and the onset of clinically significant venous thromboembolism or bleeding. "Intent to treat" analysis showed a statistically non-significant trend towards less VT during Orgaran prophylaxis (10.4%) than after heparin (14.9%) and there was no difference in bleeding complications between the two study groups. Results remained similar if only patients who completed the intended course of therapy ("compliant patients") were analysed. Other trials have shown that Orgaran prevents VT after hip surgery and stroke. We now show it is also safe and effective in patients having major surgery for cancer.
Eighty patients undergoing pelvic or abdominal surgery for cancer were randomized in two groups for prevention of postoperative thromboembolism: 40 patients received a 15,000 IU day-1 Calciparine prophylaxis and 40 patients a 5000 anti-Xa U/d Fragmin prophylaxis for 10 days. In the Calciparine group, two patients (5%) developed postoperative pulmonary embolism but none developed it in the Fragmin group. Two patients in the Fragmin group (5%) developed isotopic DVT, which was not confirmed by phlebography. There was no deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs in the two groups. Important postoperative bleeding (one patient in the Calciparine group and two patients in the Fragmin group) was similar in both groups. Moderate and minor bleeding were significantly lower in the Fragmin group. Haemoglobin and haematocrit changes, total blood loss and transfusion requirements were not different in both groups. It is concluded that, over a 10-day period, one daily 5000 U Fragmin prophylaxis was as effective and safe as three daily 5000 IU Calciparine injections.
In a prospective double-blind trial, low molecular weight (LMW) heparin (KABI 2165) 5,000 U (anti-Xa) once daily was compared with conventional heparin 5,000 IU twice daily, both given subcutaneously, as regards prevention of postoperative deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in 52 patients undergoing major abdominal surgery. Radioactive fibrinogen uptake test (FUT) was used for DVT screening. DVT, diagnosed from positive FUT, developed in two patients from each group, but could be phlebographically confirmed in only one (LMW) case. No intergroup differences were found in peroperative blood loss or requirements for blood transfusion. Complications attributable to the prophylactic regimens were few. In the LMW-heparin group, the anti-Xa levels measured during operation showed considerable variation, the higher activities (greater than 0.30 U/ml) being nonsignificantly associated with increased blood loss. Studies with lower doses of LMW-heparin are recommended.
Thirty-one patients with malignancy, anticoagulated for the treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE) are reported. Complications of treatment included major bleeding (35%), redevelopment of VTE whilst on therapeutic levels of anticoagulants (13%) and recurrent VTE following cessation of anticoagulant (42%). Forty-two per cent of patients died within three months of initiating anticoagulant therapy. The cause of death was progressive malignancy, except in one patient who died of anticoagulant-related bleeding. The high incidence of bleeding is frequently associated with over-anticoagulation and indicates the need for improved monitoring. The frequent recurrence of VTE is associated with chronic disseminated intravascular coagulation, for which warfarin is ineffective and heparin is indicated.
The course of long-term oral anticoagulation in 25 patients (186 patient-months) with cancer managed in an outpatient anticoagulation clinic was analyzed to determine the frequency of complications. Major and minor hemorrhagic complications occurred in 10.7% and 32% of treatment courses, respectively, for an incidence of 1.6% and 4.8%, respectively, per patient-month. Recurrent thromboembolism occurred in 14% of treatment courses. These results are better than previous reports in the literature, but worse than our overall anticoagulation clinic experience. Patients with cancer requiring anticoagulation are at a higher risk of hemorrhagic and thrombotic complications. Accordingly, we recommend that such patients be monitored closely, preferably by physicians experienced with such therapy, as in an anticoagulation clinic, to avoid an excessive degree of morbidity.
The aim of this review was to identify whether non-professional volunteer support might be effective in improving the uptake of child immunization. The Cochrane Library, Medline, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature and Embase databases were searched for randomized controlled trials comparing groups of parents supported by lay volunteers with those supported by conventional child health services. Two such trials met the review criteria. These studies suggested that using non-professional volunteers to support parents can be an effective strategy for improving the uptake of immunization in children younger than 2 years, but there is limited evidence to suggest that this effect is sustained for older children, Equally, intervention effects could, because of differing cultural and sociodemographical factors, be less marked when applied to British populations, in which the parents of pre-school-aged children have access to immunization support from a generic health visiting service.

Social support plays a positive role in compliance and other health behaviors. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of social support in compliance and other health behaviors for patients with sickle cell disease and diabetes. Subjects consisted of 49 patients with sickle cell disease and 78 patients with diabetes attending outpatient clinics at an urban hospital. Subjects were given questionnaires which assessed their appointment-keeping behavior, adherence to health activities, and social support. The results indicated that social support was significantly associated with appointment-keeping behavior and adherence to health activities in both the sickle cell and the diabetic sample. Implications of the study findings for improving compliance by increasing social support are discussed.

CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that high-dose quetiapine was not superior to low doses in the acute treatment of schizophrenia, both in terms of efficacy and effectiveness. In light of the absence of an assessment of trial quality and the limited follow-up periods of the included trials, the author's conclusion should be interpreted with a degree of caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared tumour necrosis factor-alpha blocking drugs for rheumatoid arthritis and concluded that adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab had similar efficacy, but infliximab may need higher doses for a similar effect. Given that this was based on an indirect comparison of only one trial of each drug and the authors highlighted a cautious interpretation, this conclusion may be overstated. 
CRD SUMMARY: The evidence suggested that early renal replacement therapy may be associated with improved survival, but the evidence was limited in study numbers and quality and conclusions could not be drawn. Given the poor quality of included studies and the presence of considerable clinical heterogeneity, the authors' cautious conclusions are appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to determine annual rates of malfunction in pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) generators. The author concluded that pacemaker reliability has improved substantially, and that the annual ICD malfunction rate is 20-fold higher than the pacemaker rate between 1988 and 2004. Owing to substantial methodological limitations, the extent to which the author's conclusions are reliable is unclear.
The fixed combination of lisinopril 20 mg and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg (L/HCTZ) was compared with each of the monocomponents in a multicentre, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study involving elderly patients with mild to severe hypertension. At the end of the trial, a total of 278 patients had completed 8 weeks of treatment. SBP reduction from baseline in the L/HCTZ group was significantly greater, sitting and standing, compared with both the monotherapy groups. Sitting DBP reduction from baseline in the L/HCTZ group was significantly greater than in the hydrochlorothiazide group. Uric acid levels were raised significantly more in the L/HCTZ group compared with the lisinopril group, and the fall in potassium levels were significantly smaller in the L/HCTZ group compared with the hydrochlorothiazide group. Safety and tolerability were equivalent for the three groups.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the performance of noninvasive techniques used to stage non-small cell lung cancer. Positron emission tomography was more accurate than computed tomography or endoscopic ultrasound for detecting mediastinal metastases. The review has a number of methodological limitations meaning that the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This meta-analysis of 18 case-control studies found no link between sunscreen use and an increased risk of melanoma. The authors used an appropriate methodology, but did not explore how assumptions about missing data might have affected the results. The findings should be interpreted with caution because the included studies were of low quality, used older sunscreen reparations, and had inadequate measures of sunscreen use.
In 4 double-blind, randomized, stratified, parallel group studies, single oral doses of fluproquazone (75 to 200 mg), a new nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic, were compared with aspirin (1,000 mg) and placebo in a total of 672 hospitalized patients with moderate or severe pain following episiotomy or other surgical interventions. A dose-dependent effect of fluproquazone which was highly significantly superior to placebo and which resembled the effect of aspirin with respect to onset, degree, and duration was noted in all studies. Fluproquazone, 100 to 150 mg, was found to be approximately equiactive to 1,000 mg of aspirin and better tolerated.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was little evidence for the effectiveness of electronic guideline-based implementation systems. The conclusions are in line with the evidence presented and appear reliable overall. However, the variety of interventions and settings included means that the generalisability of the findings to any particular setting may be limited.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that support groups did benefit caregivers of relatives with mental illness, but there was little evidence of long-term benefit. There was an extensive search and the selected studies had various methods, but the lack of transparency in the review process and the uncertain quality of these studies limit the reliability of the conclusions.
In a prospective randomized study the effect of low-molecular-weight heparin (one injection of 1500 a PPT-Units/d Mono-Embolex NM) was compared with the effect of unfractionated heparin (5000 IU t.i.d.) in 200 patients undergoing micro-neurosurgical lumbar disc operations. Criteria of evaluation were lethal pulmonary embolisms, clinical signs of pulmonary embolisms, confirmed by radioisotopic lung scans, and major bleeding complications. The present investigation demonstrates, that a single daily subcutaneous injection of Mono-Embolex NM is an effective and well tolerated measure against thrombo-embolic complications, at least equal to the established low dose heparin prophylaxis with 5000 IU t.i.d.
In a controlled study, it has been shown that the prior administration of cholera vaccine had no beneficial effect on the clinical course of cholera as measured by either the condition of the patient on admission to hospital or the subsequent course of the disease. In fact, the disease was, if anything, more severe in those who had received cholera vaccine. Although the presence of a high vibriocidal titre is associated with protection from cholera, pre-existing antibody had no effect on the clinical course of the disease in those patients who developed cholera.

Postoperative venous thromboembolic complications are commonly seen after total replacement of the hip or knee. Recently, an inherited defect with resistance to the anticoagulant activity of activated protein C (APC-resistance) has been detected. APC-resistance seems to be a common risk factor, especially in Sweden, and it increases the propensity for venous thrombosis. This study assesses the prevalence of APC-resistance in a general population and its clinical significance for patients undergoing surgery associated with a high risk of thromboembolic complications. In a prospective cohort study, we analysed for APC-resistance in 645 consecutive patients before elective replacement of the hip or knee at 3 hospitals in southern Sweden. Thromboprophylaxis with LMWH-heparin was given to all patients throughout the hospitalisation period. We recorded events of clinical thromboembolism for 3 months postoperatively. Venography, ultrasonography or pulmonary scintigraphy was requested by the clinicians according to the existing routines, i.e. only patients with symptoms of thromboembolism were examined. A thromboembolic complication was registered in 20 (3.1%) patients. Fifty per cent of the venous thrombi had a proximal location. Only 0.3% of the patients had verified pulmonary embolism. APC-resistance was found in 14.1% of the patients, of whom 9.9% had experienced postoperative thromboembolism compared with 2.0% of the patients without APC-resistance (p<0.0007). We conclude that APC-resistance is a frequent risk factor for symptomatic postoperative deep venous thrombosis with an estimated relative risk of 5.0 (95% confidence interval: from 1.9 to 12.9) in elective replacement of the hip or knee.
Efficacy of furazolidone and nalidixic acid was compared in a randomized trial involving 72 children with acute invasive diarrhea. Thirty six children received furazolidone (7.5 mg/kg/day) and 36 children received nalidixic acid (55 mg/kg/day). Clinical characteristics of the two treatment groups were comparable on admission. Of these, 34 children in furazolidone treated group and 29 children in nalidixic acid treated group completed the full course of treatment and were analyzed finally for clinical efficacy. Clinical cure was observed in 29(85.3%) children treated with furazolidone and 29(100.0%) children treated with nalidixic acid. Nalidixic acid treated group had statistically significantly higher cure rate (p = 0.039) as compared to furazolidone treated group. However, 85% cure rate in furazolidone treated group may be potentially useful for the treatment of acute invasive diarrhea because of decreasing efficacy of nalidixic acid against shigellosis in many countries.
To compare the efficacy of oral gentamicin with nalidixic acid in the treatment of acute shigellosis, we studied, in a double blind-trial, 79 comparable children with bloody diarrhoea of less than 72 h duration. Of them Shigella spp. were isolated in 71 patients. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either gentamicin 30 mg/kg/day or nalidixic acid 60 mg/kg/day, both given orally in four equal doses for 5 days. Stool frequency differed significantly between the groups from day two until completion of the study. Treatment failure was observed in 14 (42 per cent) patients receiving oral gentamicin compared to none of those with nalidixic acid-sensitive strains of Shigella spp. (P = 0.0002). Although all the shigella isolates were sensitive to gentamicin in vitro, 19 (58 per cent) patients on gentamicin therapy failed to eliminate shigella organisms from stool, compared to none in the nalidixic acid treated group infected with nalidixic acid-sensitive Shigella spp. (P < 0.001). One patient in each group had a bacteriological relapse. We conclude that gentamicin given orally was therapeutically ineffective in the treatment of acute shigellosis.
The efficacy of oral pivmecillinam was compared with nalidixic acid in the treatment of acute shigellosis in children 1-8 years of age. In a double-blind trial we studied 80 comparable children with bloody diarrhoea of less than 3 days' duration. Shigella spp. was isolated in 71 children. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either pivmecillinam, 50 mg/kg.day, or nalidixic acid, 60 mg/kg.day, both given orally for 5 days. The stool frequency decreased progressively in both treatment groups. Nalidixic acid failed to eradicate Shigella species in 10 patients, compared with three in the pivmecillinam group (p = 0.04). Similarly, clinical failure was observed in 11 of 37 patients receiving nalidixic acid and in 2 of 26 patients infected with nalidixic acid-susceptible strains as against none in the group receiving pivmecillinam. The results suggest that pivmecillinam given orally was, in fact, more effective than nalidixic acid in the treatment of acute shigellosis in children, particularly when the resistant strains are taken into account.
In a prospective randomized double-blind trial, pivmecillinam was compared with cotrimoxazole (TMP-SMX), both given orally for a period of 5 days, for the treatment of 59 children with shigellosis. 29 patients were treated with pivmecillinam and 30 with cotrimoxazole. 14% of shigella organisms isolated were resistant to pivmecillinam and 21% to TMP-SMX. The diarrhea persisted for a mean (+/- SD) period of 74 +/- 24.8 h in the pivmecillinam-treated patients versus 73.8 +/- 34 h in the TMP-SMX-treated patients. Duration of fever, positive stool culture, visible blood, occult blood, and pus cells in the stools were similar for both treatment groups. Five patients (17%) in the pivmecillinam group and 4 patients (13%) in the cotrimoxazole group fulfilled the clinical criteria that defined treatment failure. One patient (3.4%) in the pivmecillinam group and 2 (6.6%) in the TMP-SMX group evidenced recurrence of the diarrheal symptoms at the follow-up visit. No major drug-related side effects were observed in either group. We concluded that pivmecillinam is equivalent to cotrimoxazole in the treatment of shigellosis in children.
Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg every 12 h, was compared with ampicillin, 500 mg every 6 h, both given for 5 days, in the treatment of 121 adult males hospitalized with severe shigellosis. Treatment was randomized and double-blinded. At the completion of treatment, there was resolution or marked improvement in symptoms in 57 (95%) of 60 ciprofloxacin-treated patients, 23 (88%) of 26 ampicillin-treated patients infected with an ampicillin-susceptible strain of Shigella, and 15 (43%) of 35 ampicillin-treated patients infected with an ampicillin-resistant strain of Shigella (ampicillin-R group) (P less than .01, ciprofloxacin or ampicillin groups vs. ampicillin-R group). Bacteriologic failure was less common (P less than .025) in the ciprofloxacin group (0/60) than in the ampicillin (3/26, 12%) or ampicillin-R groups (5/35, 14%). Ciprofloxacin-treated patients had a mean of 29 stools during the study, compared with 46 for ampicillin-treated patients (P = .004). Thus ciprofloxacin seems to be an effective, and perhaps superior, alternative to ampicillin in treating patients with shigellosis.
We compared nalidixic acid, 55 mg/kg/day, with ampicillin, 100 mg/kg/day, both given orally for 5 days, in the treatment of children with dysentery caused by shigellosis. All patients entered into the study had illness of less than 72 hours' duration and no prior allopathic drug therapy. Treatment was randomized and administered in double-blind fashion. Patients initially treated with ampicillin who were infected with a Shigella strain resistant to ampicillin were considered as a separate group (ampicillin-R). All isolates were susceptible to nalidixic acid. Similar percentages of patients treated with nalidixic acid (26/32, 81%) and with ampicillin (17/22, 77%) were clinically cured by the end of therapy; the rate in ampicillin-R (3/14, 21%) patients was significantly lower (p less than 0.001). Stool frequency in patients treated with nalidixic acid was significantly less than for ampicillin-treated or ampicillin-R patients during the final 3 study days. All patients treated with nalidixic acid and ampicillin had Shigella eradicated from their stool by day 3, compared with 77% (10/13) of ampicillin-R patients (p less than 0.05, ampicillin-R vs nalidixic acid or ampicillin). We conclude that nalidixic acid is an effective alternative to ampicillin in the treatment of shigellosis caused by nalidixic acid-susceptible strains.
Twenty-eight infants and children hospitalized for severe shigellosis were treated orally either with ampicillin trihydrate (100 mg/kg/day administered in divided doses every six hours) or with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (trimethoprim, 10 mg; sulfamethoxazole, 50 mg/kg/day in divided doses every 12 hours) for five days. Four patients with ampicillin-resistant shigellae continued to have diarrhea and positive stool cultures during therapy. Patients with susceptible shigellae treated with ampicillin and all patients treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole responsed promptly and comparably within an average of 1.6 and 1.7 days, respectively, until stool cultures were negative, and 3.1 and 2.9 days, respectively, until diarrhea stopped. Patients with ampicillin-resistant shigellae responded to treatment with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. It is concluded that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the best currently available drug for treatment of shigellosis in areas where multiple antibiotic resistance of shigellae is common.
A computerized patient tracking system with an intuitive graphical interface was deployed in a large multidisciplinary pediatric outpatient clinic and has been enthusiastically embraced by both physicians and non-physician staff. Usage of the computerized patient tracking system has been associated with a significant decrease in the total time patients spend in the clinic. The total duration of an average patient visit has declined from 99.25 +/- 57.44 minutes to 66.94 +/- 30.47 minutes (p = 0.03). Most of this decrease has been due to a decrease in total waiting time from 54.17 +/- 37.61 minutes to 27.29 +/- 14.05 minutes (p = 0.006). Usage of the patient tracking system has also been associated with a significant increase in examination room utilization during peak business hours from 58.47 +/- 21.18% to 64.49 +/- 13.38% (p = 0.0329).

Teaching about communication between doctors and terminal cancer patients is problematic. A practical model that requires individual student problem-solving and group discussion with minimal staff involvement has been described. An evaluation showed that this model was effective in exposing students to different points of view, could result in changes in behaviour and was found to be interesting by the majority of students.

In a multicentre, randomized, double-blind controlled trial comparing the low-molecular-weight heparin enoxaparin (40 mg) with a standard unfractionated heparin (Ca-heparin, 3 x 5,000 U) in deep-vein thrombosis prophylaxis in a high-risk group of 959 hospitalized medical patients, enoxaparin was at least as efficacious as standard heparin, with fewer adverse events.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there may be useful benefits of metformin therapy in patients with overweight or insulin insensitive type 1 diabetes. Multiple issues with the conduct and reporting of the review made the reliability of the conclusions very unclear.
This study was aimed at assessing the value of prophylactic somatostatin after cephalic duodenopancreatectomy. A randomized prospective study was undertaken using two groups of patients, one with prophylactic somatostatin (4.5 mg daily in continuous perfusion for 7 days postoperatively), known as group I, and group II, which did not receive somatostatin. During a five-year period, from April 1989 to April 1994, we performed 35 duodenopancreatectomies, of which 21 belonged to group I and 14 to group II. We found a lower incidence of pancreatic anastomosis fistulae in group I (9.5% vs 35.7%; p < 0.05). We did not find any correlation between prophylaxis with somatostatin and the appearance of other complications or postoperative mortality. The mean time of fistula closure in group I was 5 days while that of group II was 19.2 days. In conclusion, the administration of prophylactic somatostatin after cephalic duodenopancreatectomy reduces the incidence and duration of pancreatic fistula.
Thirty-four inpatients in a mild phase of alcohol withdrawal, exhibiting anxious and depressive symptoms, were administered an MMPI before and immediately after a 4-week drug treatment period. A double-blind design was used; 17 patients were treated with chlordiazepoxide and 17, with thioridazine. The pretreatment MMPI profile was typical of alcoholic patients; namely, peaks on scales 4 and 2. After the fourth week, the MMPI indicated that thioridazine was significantly more effective than chlordizaepoxide. Decreases in 7 of the 10 clinical scales averaged 7.29 T-score points, whereas only scale 6 was significantly decreased for the patients treated with chlordiazepoxide.
We performed a randomized trial in which combination therapy with fluconazole and short-term flucytosine was compared with fluconazole monotherapy in 58 patients with AIDS-associated cryptococcal meningitis (CM). Thirty of these patients were randomized to receive combination therapy with fluconazole, 200 mg once a day for 2 months, and flucytosine, 150 mg/(kg.d) for the first 2 weeks, and 28 were randomized to receive monotherapy with fluconazole at the same dose for 2 months. Patients in both groups who survived for 2 months received fluconazole as maintenance therapy at a dose of 200 mg three times per week for 4 months. The combination therapy prevented death within 2 weeks and significantly increased the survival rate among these patients (32%) at 6 months over that among patients receiving monotherapy (12%) (P = .022). The combination therapy also resulted in a significant decrease in the severity of headache after 1 month of treatment, compared with monotherapy (P = .005). No serious adverse reactions were observed in patients receiving either regimen. These data indicate that treatment with fluconazole and short-term flucytosine is a cost-effective and safe regimen that improves the quality of life for patients with AIDS-associated CM in developing countries where human immunodeficiency virus is endemic.
The authors conducted a pilot randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of the transdermal administration of selegiline in HIV+ patients to obtain preliminary data to assess its safety, tolerability, and impact on HIV-associated cognitive impairment. Both selegiline and placebo were well tolerated with few adverse events. Improvements favoring the selegiline group were suggested on single tests of verbal memory and motor/psychomotor performance, warranting a larger study.
Cognitive impairment is a common and disabling complication of advanced HIV infection. Antiretroviral agents are the only proven therapies currently used for the treatment of HIV dementia, but the response to these agents is frequently unsatisfactory, short-lived, or complicated by intolerable side effects. We hypothesized that OPC-14117, a lipophilic antioxidant that acts to scavenge superoxide anion radicals, might ameliorate the toxic interactions between HIV infected macrophages and neurons. We conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial to assess the safety and tolerability of OPC-14117 240 mg per day. All 30 patients enrolled (15 per group) had cognitive impairment based on performance on neuropsychological tests. The primary outcome was tolerability of the study drug as measured by the proportion of subjects able to complete the study on their assigned dosage of experimental medication. Overall OPC-14117 was as well tolerated as placebo. Five subjects withdrew because of adverse experiences (two placebo, three OPC-14117). The OPC-14117-treated group had better scores on a clinical global impression scale, compared with the placebo group. There were trends toward improvement in the cognitive test scores; however, these changes were not statistically significant. These results demonstrate that this antioxidant intervention is well tolerated in cognitively impaired patients with advanced HIV infection, and suggest that a larger efficacy trial to assess the impact of OPC-14117 on cognitive performance is warranted.
This study compared the effectiveness of getting gay men to evaluate the self-justifications they use when breaking their safe sex rules to that of a standard approach to AIDS education. Men (n = 109) who had 'slipped up' (broken their safe sex rules by having unprotected anal intercourse) kept diaries of their sexual behaviour for 16 weeks. After 4 weeks they were allocated to one of 3 conditions, 2 involving brief interventions--Self-justifications (evaluation of self-justifications) and Standard (examination of posters used in AIDS education)--and a Control (diary only). At the time of the intervention, more members of the Self-justifications than the Standard group thought that it would help them not to slip up. In the post-intervention period, the 3 groups did not differ in the incidence of sexual activity or in the proportion who slipped up at least once, but the Self-justifications group were less likely to have had multiple slip-ups. Three possible explanations are offered for the effectiveness of the Self-justifications intervention. This approach may provide a useful alternative to standard techniques of AIDS education.
Education Now and Babies Later (ENABL), a statewide adolescent pregnancy prevention initiative, was inaugurated in California in June 1992. Developed by the state's Office of Family Planning, ENABL utilized a five-session intervention curriculum, Postponing Sexual Involvement (PSI), targeted at delaying the onset of sexual activity among youths aged 12-14. Schoolwide and community-based activities, along with a statewide media and public relations campaign, reinforced the intervention's message. Data collected from nearly 9,000 surveys, 75 individual interviews and 50 focus groups indicated that youths, parents and community representatives supported the initiative and endorsed its message, although most recommended changes to the curriculum. However, because no impact on sexual behavior could be demonstrated, the campaign was abruptly terminated in February 1996, despite recommendations that the program be retained and improved.
Loss of body cell mass, the active functioning tissue of the body, commonly occurs in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and the extent of wasting is related to the length of survival. We evaluated the anabolic role of the amino acid L-glutamine (GLN) and antioxidants in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in 26 patients with > 5% weight loss since disease onset. Subjects received GLN-antioxidants (40 g/d) in divided doses or glycine (40 g/d) as the placebo for 12 wk. Throughout the study, the subjects were seen weekly by a nutritionist, and body weight, bioelectric impedance assessment, and nutritional counseling were performed. Twenty-one subjects completed the study, and the groups were well matched. The 5 patients excluded from analysis all met a priori exclusion criteria. Over 3 mo, the GLN-antioxidant group gained 2.2 kg in body weight (3.2%), whereas the control group gained 0.3 kg (0.4%, P = 0.04 for difference between groups). The GLN-antioxidant group gained 1.8 kg in body cell mass, whereas the control group gained 0.4 kg (P = 0.007). Intracellular water increased in the GLN-antioxidant group but not in the control group. In conclusion, GLN-antioxidant nutrient supplementation can increase body weight, body cell mass, and intracellular water when compared with placebo supplementation. GLN-antioxidant supplementation provides a highly cost-effective therapy for the rehabilitation of HIV+ patients with weight loss.
HIV-1-infected patients with osteoporosis were randomly assigned to alendronate 70 mg once-weekly plus dietary counselling (n = 11) or diet counselling alone (n = 14). At week 96, 27% of patients on alendronate versus 96% of controls presented with osteoporosis. Spine bone mineral density (BMD) increases were detected at week 48, and progressed thereafter. Improvements in trochanter BMD were obtained after 2 years. Once-weekly oral alendronate may be an effective and safe treatment for HIV-1-associated osteoporosis.
Antiretroviral treatment interruption in 20 extensively pre-treated HIV-1 patients with treatment failure led to genotype viral reversion of at least one class of drug-mutation resistance in half of the patients. The only predictive factor of reversion was found to be the duration of interruption. The outgrowth of residual wild-type virus seems not to be a true genetic reversion because drug mutations are detected rapidly at salvage therapy re-initiation.
OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of the interruption of reverse transriptase inhibitor (RTI) therapy or a switch from RTI to protease inhibitors, on the genotypic drug-resistance pattern of plasma HIV-1. METHODS: Nine patients who completely stopped all medication, and five patients who switched from a treatment with RTI to a regimen containing protease inhibitors only, were studied. Direct sequencing of the plasma HIV-1 RT and protease gene was performed on follow-up samples taken before and after the interruption of treatment. RESULTS: Comparison of the amino acid sequence of the RT and protease genes in successive samples showed the rapid reappearance of wild-type viral variants in 12 of the 14 patients studied. Wild-type virus replaced the mutant strains 14 days to 2 months after the interruption of therapy, even in patients with a long treatment history. CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate the sustained lower fitness of mutant strains in vivo. As a result, wild-type virus remains capable of outcompeting the RT or protease mutant strains very fast after removal of the drug. These findings highlight the importance of 'treatment history' in addition to genotypic and phenotypic markers determined at one time-point, when making therapeutic decisions for patients.
OBJECTIVE: In this prospective, non-controlled observational study, we evaluated the middle- to long-term results of placement of inferior vena cava (IVC) filter devices in Japanese patients. METHODS AND RESULTS: In 42 Japanese patients with deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) who underwent percutaneous insertion of IVC filters, follow-up examinations at fixed intervals of 2 years were performed, and the data was evaluated including complications. There were no fatal complications during IVC filter implantation. About 5% of patients with an inserted IVC filter developed symptomatic PTE, another 5% developed asymptomatic PTE. The trapped thrombus was demonstrated in about 22% of the inserted IVC filters. Lower rates of PTE development, occlusion of IVC, and captured thrombus were found in the cases where concurrent use of anticoagulation therapy with filters was used. Trapped thrombi were found in half of IVC filters inserted prophylactically for proximal femoral venous thrombosis. CONCLUSION: These experiences with IVC filters suggest that they are safe and effective for the prevention of PTE in the Japanese population.
Anticoagulation with heparin or Coumadin is usually effective in the management of deep vein thrombosis; however, if anticoagulation treatment is contraindicated, is ineffective, or leads to adverse effects, inferior vena caval (IVC) placement of a filter is indicated. The purpose of this study is to determine whether increased early adverse effects are present in patients not given anticoagulation medication after placement of an IVC filter. The records of 240 consecutive patients who received IVC filter placement were reviewed for indications for placement, as well as for whether patients received anticoagulation medication on discharge. There were 41 in-patient mortalities. Of the remaining 199 patients, 100 were discharged and prescribed anticoagulation medication, and 99 were not. Patients were followed for 3 to 60 months. These results suggest that no early adverse effects are seen in patients who are not given anticoagulants after IVC filter placement.
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filter thrombosis has not been described as a clinical entity. Thirty patients with IVC percutaneous filter thrombosis were assessed by cavography, computed tomographic (CT) scan and/or duplex ultrasonography. All patients had proximal venous thrombosis when the filter was placed, and the indication for filter placement was a contraindication to anticoagulant therapy in eight patients (27%). Filter thrombosis occurred within 6 months following filter placement in 15 patients (early filter thrombosis group). Among these patients, 10 were not treated with oral anticoagulant, and none of the other five received adjusted anticoagulation. No patients with late filter thrombosis received anticoagulant at the time of the diagnosis. Early filter thrombosis was mainly associated with LGM filters (12 of the 15 cases). Occlusion was revealed by recurrent venous thrombosis in 18 cases. A thrombus above the filter and pulmonary embolism was found in 10 patients (33%). Thrombolytic therapy failed in 5 out of 7 cases, and all but two patients were treated with anticoagulant therapy. In conclusion, early filter thrombosis appears to be due to intracaval extension of deep vein thrombosis, and this emphasizes the need for appropriate anticoagulation. In the case of temporary contraindication to anticoagulation at the time of the filter placement, anticoagulant should be reassessed later.
Digital subtraction venacavography (DSV) as a follow-up examination was performed in 46 patients after placement of a standard stainless steel Greenfield vena caval filter (SGF). DSV is an exact method of visualizing the lumen of the inferior vena cava as well as intraluminal or captured thrombi. Eccentric filters with an angulation of more than 15 degrees were found in 8 patients causing a higher risk of pulmonary embolism from smaller emboli and propagating thrombi. Penetration of the caval wall by filter struts was however frequent (41%), without any damage to adjacent structures as demonstrated by CT scans. The long-term caval patency rate was 90%, with 4 cases of caval thrombosis. Two patients with an occluded inferior vena cava showed no venostasis. Although changes of the filter position usually remain asymptomatic, regular follow-up examinations seem necessary to recognize any impairment of the filter's clot trapping efficiency. Filters should only be used in patients with a risk of recurrent pulmonary embolism despite anticoagulation and patients with contraindications to anticoagulation therapy.
The effect of hypobaric spinal anaesthesia or narcotic-halothane-relaxant general anaesthesia on the incidence of postoperative deep vein thrombosis was studied in 140 elective total hip replacements in a prospective randomised manner. Deep vein thrombosis was diagnosed using impedance plethysmography and the 125I fibrinogen uptake test, combined, in selected cases, with ascending contrast venography. The overall incidence of deep vein thrombosis was 20%. Nine patients (13%) developed deep vein thrombosis in the spinal group and nineteen (27%) in the general anaesthetic group (p less than 0.05). The incidences of proximal thrombosis and of bilateral thrombi were also less with spinal anaesthesia than with general anaesthesia. It is concluded that spinal anaesthesia reduces the risks of postoperative thromboembolism in hip replacement surgery. The presence of varicose veins, being a non-smoker and having a low body mass index were associated with an increased incidence of deep vein thrombosis.
In an investigation on deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, where neither dextran nor antithrombotic drug prophylaxis were employed, 30 patients undergoing total hip replacement were randomly allotted to one of two groups receiving either epidural or general anaesthesia. The epidural group (n = 15) was given 0.5% bupivacaine with epinephrine (5 micrograms/ml) and this was prolonged into the postoperative period for pain relief. The general anaesthesia group (n = 15) was operated on under artificial ventilation with nitrous oxide/oxygen via an endotracheal tube and intravenously administered fentanyl and pancuronium bromide. In this group of patients narcotic analgesics (ketobemidone) were given intramuscularly on demand for pain relief postoperatively. The frequency of deep venous thrombosis involving the femoral veins, as observed at phlebography, was significantly lower in patients receiving continuous epidural block (3 of 15; 20%), than in those receiving general anaesthesia and parenteral analgesics postoperatively (11 of 15; 73%). Further, the frequency of pulmonary embolism, as determined by pulmonary perfusion lung scanning, was lower in patients receiving continuous epidural block (2 of 15) than in the general anaesthesia group (7 of 15). Possible explanations for these findings are discussed, including a hyperkinetic lower limb blood flow and lower fibrinolysis inhibition activity in patients given epidural block. Lower blood transfusion requirements in patients given epidural block might also play a role, as well as a "stabilizing" effect of local anaesthetics on platelets, leukocytes and endothelial cells.
Subarachnoid block (SAB) or general anaesthesia (GA) was induced in 85 patients undergoing total hip replacement. The frequency of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), assessed by fibrinogen uptake studies and venography, was 29% in those patients receiving SAB and 54% in the GA group. Total blood loss (intra-operative and post-operative wound suction drainage) in SAB group was 66% and total transfusion volume 52% of that of GA group. No morbidity attributable to SAB or to the associated arterial hypotension was detected.
In a clinical trial involving 155 dental arches with irregularity > 5 mm, the rate of alignment was used to compare the alignment efficiency of 16 mil superelastic Ni-Ti versus 17.5 mil triple-stranded steel archwires, and to determine whether ion implantation of the Ni-Ti wire improved its performance. Subjects were randomly assigned to archwire types; both 18 and 22 slot edgewise appliances were employed. Pre-treatment equivalence of the experimental groups was verified. Anterior irregularity was determined monthly (using Little's irregularity index) until it decreased below 2 mm, and the elastomeric ligatures were replaced at each appointment. Effective tooth movement occurred with each of the archwire types. There were no significant differences among wires, but the rate of alignment was significantly faster in the lower arch for subjects with the 22 slot appliance.
The effect of intravenous recombinant human tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) was compared with that of urokinase in 45 patients with angiographically documented pulmonary embolism (PE) in a randomised controlled trial. The two principal end-points were clot lysis at 2 h, as assessed by angiography, and pulmonary reperfusion at 24 h, as assessed by perfusion lung scanning. All patients received the full dose of rt-PA but urokinase infusions were terminated prematurely (on average after 18 h) in 9 patients because of allergy in 1 and uncontrollable bleeding in 8. By 2 h, 82% of rt-PA-treated patients showed clot lysis, compared with 48% of urokinase-treated patients (p = 0.008; 95% CI for the difference = 10-58%). Improvement in lung scan reperfusion at 24 h was identical in the two treatment groups. The reduction in fibrinogen did not differ significantly between the rt-PA and urokinase groups (45% vs 39% at 2 h and 34% vs 40% at 24 h). The results indicate that in the dose regimens employed, rt-PA acts more rapidly and is safer than urokinase in the treatment of acute PE.
Our objective was to assess efficacy and tolerance of thrombolysis using 0.6 mg/kg of Alteplase in patients with massive pulmonary embolism defined as the association of a pulmonary embolism with shock. We retrospectively included 21 patients presenting with a massive pulmonary embolism confirmed by either scintigraphy or spiral computed tomography. Patients were treated on the basis of a standard rationale followed by thrombolysis with 0.6 mg/kg Alteplase over a period of 15 minutes. Hospital mortality, vital signs before and 2 hours after thrombolysis, and incidence of hemorrhagic events were recorded. Five patients (23.8%) died, 4 of these deaths occurred during the first 4 hours after hospital admission. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure (Sp02) were significantly improved 2 hours after the beginning of thrombolysis. Five minor hemorrhagic events occurred. This study demonstrates that for patients with pulmonary embolism and shock, a bolus treatment with Alteplase is potentially effective and well tolerated.
The efficacy of streptokinase was studied in an open trial on 30 consecutive patients with major pulmonary embolism, affecting at least three lobar arteries in pulmonary angiography. Streptokinase was started on average 26 hours from the onset of symptoms and usually given directly to the pulmonary artery. Conventional dosage was used and adjusted by thrombin time. The average treatment period was 32 hours. 26 patients (87%) survived and made a good clinical recovery. Improvement occurred early: signs of improved pulmonary perfusion appeared usually within four hours. Repeat angiograms in 20 patients showed remarkable increase in pulmonary perfusion and partial but not complete lysis of the emboli. Four patients (13%) died, three of them because of no response and one due to late cardiac arrhythmia. Bleeding requiring blood transfusion occurred in four patients, but caused no late sequelae. It is concluded that streptokinase treatment of major pulmonary embolism is effective and safe in rapidly restoring pulmonary perfusion.
The extent of early resolution of major pulmonary embolism observed in 10 patients after 24 hours of treatment with heparin was compared with that seen in 17 patients after 24 hours of treatment with streptokinase. The patients in the streptokinase group also received a loading dose of heparin and were treated with heparin by continuous infusion when their thrombin time returned to normal levels. All had pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary embolism was classified as acute in the 10 patients in the heparin group. Seven of these patients showed no angiographic change, two showed slight improvement and one showed angiographic deterioration. There was a moderate and statistically insignificant fall in mean pulmonary arterial pressure and total pulmonary resistance. Fourteen of the 17 patients who were studied before and after streptokinase were classified as acute and three as subacute progressive major pulmonary embolism. Eight showed marked angiographic improvement, four moderate and two slight angiographic improvement. There was a moderate and statistically significant fall in the mean pulmonary arterial pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance. In addition, all seven patients in whom no angiographic improvement occurred during heparin therapy showed moderate or marked angiographic improvement after a further 24 hours of treatment with streptokinase. The results strongly suggest that streptokinase therapy accelerates thrombolysis in patients with acute major pulmonary embolism.
In an open, randomised controlled study, 101 patients with phlebographically diagnosed deep vein thrombosis of the leg, not extending into more than two thirds of the femoral vein, were randomised to receive Fragmin (a low molecular weight heparin) administered subcutaneously either once or twice daily in doses of 200 U(anti-FXa)/kg/24h or 100 U(anti-FXa)/kg/12h respectively. Prior to Fragmin unfractionated heparin had been administered by continuous iv infusion for not longer than 24h. Warfarin was administered from the first treatment day. Fragmin was administered for at least 5 days or until the prothrombin complex had been within the therapeutic range for at least 2 days. Patients were kept in bed for the first day but thereafter were ambulant. Phlebography was repeated at 5-7 days. Comparison of the phlebograms revealed a similar improvement (reduction in Marder score) in both groups. There were 5 cases of bleeding: 1 major and 3 minor in the twice daily group and 1 minor bleed in the once daily group. There were no cases of clinical pulmonary embolism. It is concluded that Fragmin, administered as a single daily subcutaneous injection, is effective in the treatment of deep vein thromboses, and offers the advantages of reduced costs, despite higher price of the drug, including reduced nursing time.
Treatment of deep venous thrombosis with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH-Novo, Logiparin) was carried out with two different doses of Logiparin, 75 XaI U/kg b.w. twice daily and 150 XaI U/kg b.w. once daily subcutaneously for 5 days. Simultaneously warfarin was given from the first day of heparin treatment. Mean age of the twenty patients was 65 years and one third was females. No serious side effects, hematomas, pulmonary emboli or signs of recurrent thrombosis occurred during treatment with either dose regime. Venografic assessment with Marder scoring one week after initiation of Logiparin treatment showed a slight not significant improvement apparent in 40% of the patients. The activities of F-IIaI and F-XaI in the blood plasma were found to increase after injection of Logiparin. These two parameters seem to be the most suitable for monitoring the effect during treatment. For future studies on the therapeutic effect of Logiparin in deep venous thrombosis a single dose of 150 to 200 F-XaI activity per 24 hours seems to be most suitable.
A total of 164 patients were recruited from a randomized trial comparing a low molecular weight heparin, dalteparin, given subcutaneously once daily with a continuous intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of acute deep vein thrombosis. The primary objective of this follow-up study was to investigate whether there were any differences between the two treatment groups with respect to Marder score changes 6 months after the initial diagnosis using repeated venography. The secondary objectives were to analyse whether certain haemostatic and acute phase parameters or patient characteristics influenced the venographic outcome. RESULTS: Complete lysis of the thrombus was observed in 38.4% of the patients and a partial lysis in another 54.3% assessed by venography 6 months after the acute event. Extension of the thrombus was seen in 7.3% of the patients. There were no significant differences in the change in mean Marder score before treatment and at the 6 month follow-up between the two treatment groups, irrespective of thrombus localisation. In a regression model, male gender, low levels of orosomucoid and increased levels of d-dimer in plasma on day 5 were independently associated (p <0.05) with an enhanced absolute resolution of the thrombus at 6 months. No differences in symptoms and signs in the thrombotic leg at follow-up, comparing the treatment given, or thrombus extension at diagnosis and 6 months later, were demonstrated. CONCLUSION: Dalteparin given once daily subcutaneously was as effective as continuous intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of deep vein thrombosis assessed by Marder score evaluation 6 months after the acute event.
Low-molecular-weight heparins have been extensively investigated in the treatment of deep venous thrombosis but limited data are available concerning their use in pulmonary embolism. In an open, pilot, randomized study, we compare the safety and efficacy of Fragmin, a low-molecular-weight heparin with those of unfractionated heparin in 60 patients with non massive pulmonary embolism (Miller Index < 20). Thirty one patients received unfractionated heparin intravenously and 29 received a fixed dose of 120 Anti-Xa IU/kg of Fragmin administered subcutaneously twice a day for 10 days. There was no pulmonary embolism recurrence nor major bleeding in either group during the treatment period. The decrease in pulmonary vascular obstruction on perfusion lung scan between day 0 and day 10 was 17 +/- 13% in the Fragmin group and 16 +/- 13% in the heparin group (NS). These results indicate that Fragmin may be a safe and effective treatment of submassive pulmonary embolism.
BACKGROUND: We compared the efficacy and safety of different dosages of a low-molecular-weight heparin, CY 216 D (Fraxiparine), in the treatment of submassive pulmonary embolism with unfractionated heparin in a prospective, randomized, dose-finding study. METHODS AND RESULTS: The primary outcome was the evolution of pulmonary vascular obstruction. We enrolled 101 patients. Four patient groups were formed: standard heparin by continuous intravenous infusion (group 1) and Fraxiparine subcutaneously 400, 600, and 900 anti-Xa Institute Choay units/kg, respectively (groups 2, 3, and 4). Inclusions were stopped prematurely in groups 3 and 4 because of the incidence of major bleedings. At day 8, the improvement of the pulmonary vascular obstruction and the major bleedings were similar in groups 1 and 2. CONCLUSIONS: The Fraxiparine dosage of 400 anti-Xa Institute Choay units/kg is as effective and safe as unfractionated heparin in the treatment of submassive pulmonary embolism.
A double-blind randomized trial was conducted to research a hypercoagulable state rebound after abrupt versus gradual withdrawal of acenocoumarol, 20 patients were included: 10 in the abrupt withdrawal group (AW) and 10 in the gradual withdrawal group (GW). Between days 1 and 15,F1 + 2 was higher in group AW (P < 0.002). A significant increase of D-dimer with time was found (P < 0.001) without difference between the two groups, tPA and PAI-1 levels remained stable throughout without difference between the two groups. No rebound phenomenon was observed. Four thrombotic recurrences were observed: group AW: 1, group GW: 3 (P = 0.29). There is neither clinical nor biological support for a gradual anticoagulation withdrawal.
In a double-blind, randomised study of thromboprophylaxis in patients undergoing total hip replacement, we compared a low-molecular-weight heparin with a placebo. Of the 120 patients enrolled, 112 completed the trial; 58 in the treatment group and 54 in the placebo group. Nine (16%) patients in the treatment group and 19 (35%) in the placebo group developed deep venous thrombosis, diagnosed by the 125I-fibrinogen uptake test (p < 0.02). Verification was obtained by phlebography in 86% of the patients. Prolonged surgery increased the risk of thrombosis in the placebo group but not in the treatment group (p < 0.05). There were significantly more cases of deep venous thrombosis in the placebo group during the first four postoperative days (p < 0.02). The groups did not differ with respect to peroperative and postoperative bleeding. Low-molecular-weight heparin offers safe and easily administered thromboprophylaxis in total hip replacement.
Efficacy and safety of a low molecular weight heparin (Alfa LMWH) was compared with unfractionated heparin (UFH) in the prevention of post-operative venous thromboembolism after hip fractures. Forty-nine patients were randomized to treatment with Alfa LMWH 7500 anti-Xa coagulometric units twice daily or with UFH 5000 IU t.i.d. Screening for thrombosis was performed with 125-I-fibrinogen leg scanning and strain-gauge plethysmography. Positive results were confirmed by venography. Five patients in the Alfa LMWH group (20 per cent) developed venographycally proven deep vein thrombosis (DVT) versus seven (29 per cent) in the UFH group. One pulmonary embolism and two deaths occurred in the UFH group and none in the LMWH group. No differences in haemorrhagic complications and blood loss indices were observed. Alfa LMWH appears to be a promising drug for prevention of venous thromboembolism after orthopaedic surgery. A "flexible" schedule of administration is proposed on the basis of the results of plasma anti-Xa assays.
In a prospective, double-blind, controlled study, we compared the antithrombotic efficacy of low-dose heparin with dihydroergotamine (A), low-molecular-weight heparin with dihydroergotamine (B), and placebo (C). Two hundred and thirteen patients surgically treated for fractures of the hip were randomly divided into three groups. One hundred and sixty-one patients were analyzed. All thrombi were verified by ascending phlebography. Nine patients died within 1 month after operation. A and B proved to be equally safe but failed to provide any protection against deep-vein thrombosis, although B showed a tendency to reduce the incidence. Mortality within 1 month of operation was unaffected by the type of prophylaxis.
The prophylactic antithrombotic efficacy of a low molecular weight heparin was compared with a traditional unfractionated calcium heparin after orthopaedic surgery in 140 patients. Deep vein thromboses were detected in legs either by Doppler sonography or [125I]fibrinogen uptake tests in five (7.1%) and seven (10%) patients, respectively. The capacity of both drugs to prevent deep vein thrombosis was demonstrated. Compared with the control group, those who used low molecular weight heparin showed a significant increase of activated factor X inhibition and smaller increases in activated partial thromboplastin times. Tolerability of both drugs was good, with a low incidence of local side-effects.
In a double-blind, randomized trial, the antithrombotic effect and haemorrhagic complications of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (Heparin fragment 2165, KabiVitrum) and unfractionated heparin (UH) were compared. LMWH (5000 anti-XaU) was injected every 24 h, UH (5000 IU) every 12 h; both drugs by subcutaneous injection. During 1984-85, 215 patients were examined clinically and by plethysmography. Venography was performed whenever DVT was suspected. None of the patients proved to have DVT. Bleeding complications were found in 54% of the cases. The LMWH group had a statistically significant predominance of bleeding complications as reflected by wound haematomas (p = 0.02) and the number of blood transfusions (p = 0.02). The heparin concentration was higher in the LMWH group (mean 0.13 IU/ml) than in the UH group (mean 0.13 IU/ml) measured 2 h after the injection. In the doses administered, LMWH and UH seem effective in the prevention of thrombosis. The increased bleeding tendency in the LMWH group probably was a consequence of the to high dosage.
In 160 high risk patients with total hip replacement the antithrombotic efficacy and tolerance of a single daily injection of 1500 aPTT-U (aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time) low molecular weight heparin plus 0.5 mg dihydroergotamine (HNMD; Embolex NM) was compared with a twice daily application of 5000 IU of the heparin-dihydroergotamine combination Heparin-Dihydergot in a double-blind study. Deep vein thrombosis measured by means of the radiofibrinogen uptake test occurred in 20.5% of patients in both groups. In addition, intra- and postoperative blood loss and the development of hematoma were similar in both groups. Thus, on account of the "once-daily" application HNMD offers some substantial advantages: The stress of the patient in the postoperative convalescence phase can be appreciably lowered and thereby the nursing staff are spared a great deal of work.
BACKGROUND: Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common source of morbidity and mortality in general surgical patients. Guidelines have been produced to help guide doctors through the complex issue of VTE prophylaxis. This study intended to examine the use of VTE prophylaxis amongst general surgeons in Scotland, with reference to nationally produced guidelines. METHOD: A postal questionnaire was sent to all consultant general surgeons in Scotland. They were asked to give their opinion on the best means of VTE prophylaxis in six different clinical scenarios. The responses were evaluated with reference to the guidelines from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). RESULTS: A 69% response rate was achieved. There was a wide variance in the suggested prophylaxis in each of the scenarios. With reference to SIGN guidelines, 35% of responses represented undertreatment, 16% overtreatment and 49% appropriate treatment. CONCLUSION: Despite the publication of VTE guidelines, there is still a wide variety of opinions amongst consultant general surgeons with regards to VTE prophylaxis. Many of the responses were not consistent with such guidelines and represent suboptimal prophylaxis for patients.
Deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) is a serious problem that affects millions of people annually. Prophylaxis against DVT following major orthopaedic surgery can save lives and health care dollars. Proper application of the prophylactic regimen by nursing and the interdisciplinary team can be a major key in affecting the outcome of the orthopaedic patient. To obtain successful outcomes, the educational needs of each individual in the interdisciplinary team must be met. Also, being aware of each physician's practice patterns, implementing their individual preferences, and ensuring that all equipment is available and used in a consistent manner will enhance the desired outcome.
An audit of the introduction of a protocol for thromboprophylaxis at caesarean section revealed over treatment of low risk women and the under treatment of high risk women. A routine computer generated risk assessment profile was introduced as part of a maternity information system. Reaudit showed a significant improvement in adherence to the thromboprophylaxis protocol in all risk groups.
Each hospital department tends to have its own DVT prophylaxis protocol generally based on the recommendations of the THRIFT consensus group. This is developed to help the junior medical staff to prescribe the appropriate prophylaxis according to risk assessment. However, adherence to the protocol tends to be haphazard unless actively enforced. This study is aimed at determining whether active enforcement of the protocol improves the uptake of prophylaxis.
OBJECTIVE: To measure the effect of a computerized reminder system on the rate of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis in surgical patients. DESIGN: A prospective trial to measure change in compliance compared to historic controls. MEASUREMENTS: LDS Hospital surgeons developed local consensus as to which procedures should have DVT prophylaxis. The historic rate of prophylaxis for the procedures was measured through a database search of patient records. A computerized reminder system was then implemented which utilized an expert knowledge base and a time drive mechanism to flag surgical cases for DVT prophylaxis. For eligible patients, a DVT reminder appeared on the operating room schedule; surgical staff used this as a guide to apply prophylaxis. During the 3 month trial the rate of DVT prophylaxis was remeasured and compared to the pre-intervention rate. RESULTS: The pre-intervention rate of DVT prophylaxis over a 3 month period was 85.2% (785 of 921 eligible cases). For the 3 months following the introduction of the computerized reminder, compliance with DVT prophylaxis increased to 99.3% (1084 of 1092 eligible cases). The difference between the historic controls and the study subjects was highly significant (p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: A computerized reminder is an effective method of increasing the rate of DVT prophylaxis in surgical patients.
The authors conducted a quantitative literature review of the impact of 32 diet and physical activity (PA) interventions delivered in health care settings on cardiovascular disease risk factors. Intervention effects were relatively modest but statistically significant for PA, body mass index or weight, dietary fat, blood pressure, and total and low-density lipoprotein serum cholesterol. Intervention effects were generally larger for samples with a mean age >50 years and for studies with <6 months follow-up. Type of comparison group, type of intervention, and use of a behavior theory did not have a consistent impact on intervention effects. Few studies focused on persons of color, although the results from these studies are promising.

Inappropriate behaviors are very common in dementia and impose an enormous toll both emotionally and financially. Three main psychosocial theoretical models have generally been utilized to explain inappropriate behaviors in dementia: the "unmet needs" model, a behavioral/learning model, and an environmental vulnerability/reduced stress-threshold model. A literature search yielded 83 nonpharmacological intervention studies, which utilized the following categories of interventions: sensory, social contact (real or simulated), behavior therapy, staff training, structured activities, environmental interventions, medical/nursing care interventions, and combination therapies. The majority are reported to have a positive, albeit not always significant, impact. Better matching of the available interventions to patients' needs and capabilities may result in greater benefits to patients and their caregivers.

CRD COMMENTARY: The authors have stated the research question but have not listed any inclusion or exclusion criteria for the review. The literature search is adequate although the dates of the searches are not given and it is not stated whether there were any language restrictions. Hence, it is possible that non-English studies and unpublished relevant studies may have been missed.
The authors have not reported on how the articles were selected or how many reviewers selected the articles and extracted the data. The quality assessment procedure is described but is not rigorous or scored statistically. Individual study details are not given; neither are the number of participants who were included in the review. The studies are statistically combined using effect sizes which may have been inappropriate because of the variety between the studies and the large number of moderator variables and measurement scales in the individual studies.
The authors mention several methodological drawbacks for the included studies. Since there is insufficient data reported from the individual studies, and about the process of performing this review, so the author's conclusions should be viewed with caution.

This study consisted of a randomized controlled trial of a 1-session motivational intervention for college student binge drinkers. Sixty students who reported binge drinking 2 or more times in the past 30 days were randomly assigned to either a no-treatment control or a brief intervention group. The intervention provided students with feedback regarding personal consumption, perceived drinking norms, alcohol-related problems, situations associated with heavy drinking, and alcohol expectancies. At 6-week follow-up, the brief intervention group exhibited significant reductions on number of drinks consumed per week, number of times drinking alcohol in the past month, and frequency of binge drinking in the past month. Estimates of typical student drinking mediated these reductions. This study replicates earlier research on the efficacy of brief interventions with college students and extends previous work regarding potential mechanisms of change.

Sixty boys, aged 1-10 yr, undergoing orchidopexy were allocated randomly to receive one of three solutions for caudal extradural injection. Group A received 0.25% bupivacaine 1 ml kg-1 with adrenaline 5 micrograms ml-1 (1/200,000), group C received 0.25% bupivacaine 1 ml kg-1 with clonidine 2 micrograms kg-1 and group K received 0.25% bupivacaine 1 ml kg-1 with ketamine 0.5 mg kg-1. Postoperative pain was assessed using a modified objective pain score and analgesia was administered if this score exceeded 4. The median duration of caudal analgesia was 12.5 h in group K compared with 5.8 h in group C (P < 0.05) and 3.2 h in group A (P < 0.01). There were no differences between the groups in the incidence of motor block, urinary retention or postoperative sedation.

In 1986 in the Kuthar Valley in the Anantnag District of south Kashmir (northwestern India), we studied the population to ascertain the prevalence and pattern of various neurological diseases. A house-to-house survey was done in a rural population of 63,645 (according to a World Health Organization protocol, 1981). 616 cases of major neurological disorders were detected, yielding a prevalence of ratio of 9.67/1,000 as of prevalence day November 1, 1986. The prevalence ratios for various common neurological disorders were: epilepsy 2.47/1,000; stroke 1.43/1,000; paralytic poliomyelitis 2.18/1,000; mental retardation 2.09/1,000; deaf mutism 1.63/1,000, and cerebral palsy 1.24/1,000. Persons with these conditions constituted 92% of all neurological cases. Patients with motor neuron disease, Alzheimer's dementia or multiple sclerosis were not found.

CRD SUMMARY: Alpha-lipoic acid, chromium, folic acid, isoflavones, magnesium, pycnogenol, selenium, vitamin C, vitamin E, and zinc showed positive effects on various outcome measures relating to insulin resistance and cardiovascular factors in patients with type 2 diabetes. Given the lack of reporting on methodological processes and unclear results, the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution as they may be unreliable.
CRD SUMMARY: Doripenem appeared to be non-inferior in Phase III trials to meropenem for the treatment of intra-abdominal infections, levofloxacin for urinary tract infections, and imipenem and piperacillin/tazobactam for nosocomial pneumonia. However, the reliability of the review methods and data were unclear, so the authors' findings may not be valid and should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This generally well-conducted review found that medial patellofemoral ligament reconstruction may provide favourable clinical and radiological outcomes for patients with patellar instability. However, the paucity of available evidence and the poor quality of the included studies limits the reliability of the results of the review.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined the mortality and hospitalisation rates associated with the use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The authors concluded that lower rates of hospitalisation and mortality were found to be associated with ICS use. However, concerns about potential biases in the review data mean that the findings are unlikely to be robust.
Surgical gloves are worn to protect both the patient and the surgical team from transferred infections. Wearing two pairs of gloves, perforation indicator systems, glove liners, knitted gloves and triple gloving are said to offer additional protection. This paper presents the main findings from a Cochrane systematic review of 30 trials examining surgical gloving practice.

CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the accuracy of magnetic resonance colonography (MRC), compared with conventional colonoscopy, for the detection of colorectal cancer. The authors concluded that MRC is highly discriminative for colorectal cancer, but more research is needed to define its exact diagnostic role. Limitations in the methods of analysis mean that these conclusions should be viewed with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that subcutaneous administration of dalteparin, enoxaparin or reviparin in hospital, as an adjunct to various thrombolytics in ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction, appears feasible and at least as effective and safe as intravenous unfractionated heparin. Owing to shortcomings in the review methodology, the conclusions have to be regarded with caution.
A family-based, cognitive behavioural treatment for anxiety in 47 children with comorbid anxiety disorders and High Functioning Autism Spectrum Disorder (HFA) was evaluated. Treatment involved 12 weekly group sessions and was compared with a waiting list condition. Changes between pre- and post-treatment were examined using clinical interviews as well as child-, parent- and teacher-report measures. Following treatment, 71.4% of the treated participants no longer fulfilled diagnostic criteria for an anxiety disorder. Comparisons between the two conditions indicated significant reductions in anxiety symptoms as measured by self-report, parent report and teacher report. Discussion focuses on the implications for the use of cognitive behaviour therapy with HFA children, for theory of mind research and for further research on the treatment components.

CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of symptomatic treatment of migraine in children. The authors' conclusion that acetaminophen, ibuprofen and nasal sumatriptan are all effective treatments for migraine episodes in children may be overstated, as most treatments have only been tested in one or two small trials and some of the analysis might not have been entirely appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that both low- and high-potency statins were efficacious in preventing death and cardiovascular-related morbidity in people at low risk of cardiovascular events, although the number needed to treat to prevent one adverse outcome was relatively high for any statin. The authors' conclusions reflect the evidence available and appear likely to be reliable.
Four hundred seventy-seven patients suspected of having had acute myocardial infarction within less than 12 hours were randomized to receive i.v. atenolol followed by oral treatment for 10 days or to a control group. In patients with ECG changes indicative of infarction at entry, i.v. atenolol significantly reduced enzyme release by one-third and enhanced R-wave preservation. In patients without such ECG changes, treatment significantly prevented the development of infarction in a proportion of patients. There was also a significant reduction in R-on-T ectopics, repetitive ventricular arrhythmias and supraventricular arrhythmias. Treated patients had significantly greater pain relief and required fewer opiate analgesics. Significantly fewer atenolol-treated patients died by 10 days (the treatment period), had nonfatal cardiac arrests, developed heart failure, or suffered reinfarction.

In this paper 13 613 triple test results from the period 1992- 1997 were analysed. The probability of receiving a high risk result for Down's syndrome from a serum screen, related to the patient's age, was calculated. The modes of delivery of the patients receiving a high risk result were also compared with the rest of the population. The probability of receiving a high risk result increased from 1.2% at 25 years of age to 43.9% at 40 years of age. There was a decrease in the likelihood of having operative intervention at delivery amongst the high risk group but this did not reach statistical significance. This highlights the need for accurate information in risk and probability when counselling a patient undergoing serum screening. Patient's anxiety relating to mode of delivery may also be alleviated by knowing they have no greater risk of operative delivery.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of losigamone (LSG).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Double-blind, placebo-controlled add-on study with 3x500 mg LSG/die for the treatment of chronic partial seizures in 203 patients (99 treated with LSG, 104 on placebo).
RESULTS: The median percent change of seizures was 14.9% (LSG) versus 6.7% (placebo) (P=0.004). Seizure frequency was decreased by more than 50% in 22.3% (LSG) and 14.6% (placebo) of patients (P=0.13). Mean percent change of seizures was best in patients with only one additional anticonvulsant drug (LSG versus placebo, P=0.004). Adverse events (usually CNS-related side effects of mild to moderate intensity) were reported in 59.6% (LSG) and 37.5% (placebo) of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: LSG proved to be an effective and well tolerated anticonvulsant drug for the treatment of chronic partial seizures.

On the long term Parkinson Disease (PD) treatment is often complicated by the occurrence of motor fluctuations. To find out whether early treatment of PD with levodopa, dopaminoagonists or l-deprenyl is associated with any difference in motor fluctuations occurrence, the Italian Parkinson Study Group initiated a multicenter, randomized study. Since November 1988, 475 patients requiring effective treatment for idiopathic PD have been randomized to receive levodopa, dopamine agonists or deprenyl. After 2 months of therapy, all patients evaluated with the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale showed a significant amelioration. Daily living activities were more impaired in patients treated with deprenyl. Study design is presented and first results are discussed.

A total of 713 patients with hypertension were evaluated in eight randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of terazosin administered in single daily doses ranging from 1 to 40 mg. In three of these studies, terazosin or placebo was added to ongoing antihypertensive drug therapy. Patient response was categorized (from excellent to inadequate) according to the change in supine diastolic blood pressure from baseline and the value at the final visit. The distribution of patients in these response categories differed significantly between patients treated with terazosin and those treated with placebo. Overall, 52 percent of terazosin-treated patients in these eight studies, compared with 30 percent of placebo-treated patients, had good to excellent responses. Subgroup analysis revealed that blood pressure response was not dependent on sex or age, although white patients appeared to achieve better responses to terazosin in comparison with placebo than did black patients. These studies demonstrate that terazosin administered once daily, either as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents, effectively controls blood pressure in patients with mild to moderate hypertension.

OBJECTIVES: To determine knowledge, behavior, and attitude among Kansas residents exposed to a statewide West Nile Virus health education campaign.
METHODS: Telephone survey employing random selection of urban and rural counties and telephone numbers.
RESULTS: Knowledge was widespread, preventive behaviors less so. TV, newspapers, and word-of-mouth were most frequently cited sources of information. A small percentage of individuals received information from health professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: Recommendations are made for designing and implementing future campaigns, including taking into account target population demographics, populations at highest risk, and channels of communication. Greater use of the Internet, word of mouth, and newspapers appear most promising.

Disadvantages and risks related to teenage pregnancy, together with a recent increase in Scottish conception rates among teenagers aged 13-15 years old, give cause for concern. Using an illustrated short story and questionnaire, attitudes of 129 Ayrshire teenagers aged 14-15 years old were examined to teenage pregnancy, and more generally to early sex. Seventy-three percent of girls advocated joint responsibility for contraceptive protection compared with only 46% of boys (p<0.01). Also, significantly more boys than girls saw nothing wrong with casual sex (21%vs. 5%, p<0.01), and significantly less boys than girls upheld the virtue of commitment in sexual relationships (27%vs. 54%, p<0.01). Sex education programmes should explore these gender-related disparities.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed interventions providing support for family carers of elderly co-habiting persons at home. The authors appear to conclude that it is uncertain if carers benefit from the interventions. Limitations of the review included poor reporting of the review methods and an inadequate validity assessment. However, given the apparent, general poor quality of the included studies, the authors' conclusions appear reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of bariatric surgery for morbid obesity. The authors concluded that the methodological quality of primary studies up to 2002 has been poor. The authors' conclusions are appropriate and warranted given the evidence reviewed.
BACKGROUND: PMD are disabling, but lack any generally accepted treatment strategies.
DESIGN/METHODS: Ten patients with PMD received treatment with Psychodynamic Psychotherapy. Patients were assessed with psychiatric rating scales and the movement disorder was rated by a blinded rater with the Psychogenic Movement Disorder Rating Scale (PMDRS).
RESULTS: Total mean PMDRS (p = 0.0195), total PMDRS function scores (p = 0.0142), Hamilton depression scores (p = 0.009), Beck anxiety scores (p = 0.002), and GAF (p = 0.0083) all improved with psychotherapeutic intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychotherapy and appropriate use of adjunct psychiatric medication can be a successful intervention for PMD.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of dopexamine on hepatosplanchnic and renal perfusion in high-risk and critically ill patients. The authors concluded that evidence on dopexamine was inconsistent and inadequate. The evidence presented appears to support the authors' conclusions. However, the lack of reporting of methodological aspects of the review makes it difficult to assess the strength of the conclusions.
The helpfulness of 18F-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) in restaging non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been extensively evaluated. A total of 156 patients referred for restaging of NSCLC were retrospectively evaluated. According to the classification of American Joint Committee on Cancer, stages I and II were defined as conventionally resectable, stage IIIA as locally advanced but resectable, stage IIIB as locally advanced but unresectable, and stage IV as absolutely unresectable. Compared to initial staging by chest computed tomographic findings, FDG-PET down-staged 45/156 (29%) and up-staged 52/156 (33%) NSCLCs. In addition, 37/156 (23%) patients were reclassified from resectable to unresectable and 22/156 (14%) patients were reclassified from unresectable to resectable. Our results prove the helpfulness of whole body FDG-PET for restaging NSCLC.

To determine the protective efficacy (PE) of three doses of oral B subunit-killed whole cell (BS-WC) or killed whole cell-only (WC) vaccines against cholera, a clinical trial was conducted among 62285 children over 2 years and adult women in rural Bangladesh. During 5 years of follow-up, there were 144 cases of cholera in the BS-WC group (PE = 49%; P < 0.001), 150 in the WC group (PE = 47%; P < 0.001), and 283 in the K12 group. Protection by each vaccine was evident only during the first three years of follow-up; long-term protection of young children was observed only against classical but not El Tor cholera; 3-year protection against both cholera biotypes occurred among older persons, but at a higher level against classical cholera.

We assessed the incidence and predictors of unprotected sex among 152 HIV-positive patients in clinical care in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Nearly 50% were sexually active; 30% of those reported unprotected sex. Alcohol use during sex, reporting forced sex, sex with a perceived HIV-positive partner, and sex with a casual partner predicted more unprotected sex, whereas HIV status disclosure was related to less unprotected sex. These findings highlight the need for linking HIV prevention and care in Africa.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that dose-dense chemotherapy improved overall and disease-free survival in women with non-metastatic breast cancer, at least in those with hormone-receptor negative disease. However, as the authors pointed out, more research is required to investigate whether the findings apply equally to women with hormone-receptor negative and hormone-receptor positive disease. 
CRD SUMMARY: The evidence did not demonstrate a clear benefit for treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma with octreotide. Further well-conducted research is needed. Given the limited evidence available, the authors' recommendation to interpret the findings with caution should be borne in mind, and their recommendation for further research seems appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that atypical antipsychotics were used for a range of off-label conditions with varied results and it may not be appropriate to assume class effects. The conclusions of this broad review should be considered carefully for each individual condition bearing in mind the acknowledged presence of publication bias, potential language bias and unexplained heterogeneity.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) may increase mortality at one year or more (late all-cause mortality) compared with on-pump CABG. Some caution is warranted in interpreting the reliability of the authors' conclusion, given potential methodological limitations in the review process and results which appeared to be heavily influenced by one trial.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that although more research using consistent definitions was needed, evidence suggested that off-pump coronary artery bypass reduced the risk of acute kidney injury. Randomised trials were underpowered to detect any effect on need for renal replacement therapy; evidence from observational studies suggested a beneficial effect. Most data came from observational studies. The authors' conclusions appear suitably cautious.
CRD SUMMARY: This generally well-conducted review found that compared to on-pump coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, off-pump CABG surgery may be associated with a lower rate of acute kidney injury but may not affect dialysis requirement. Clinical variations across the trials precluded firm conclusions. The authors' cautious conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded there was a decreased rate of revascularisation and 12-month major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular events for off-pump coronary artery bypass graft compared with percutaneous coronary intervention. The authors' conclusions represent the evidence presented but, given the possibility of publication bias and the unknown quality of included studies, the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found a possible structural healing benefit for double-row compared to single-row arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, but little evidence to support any functional differences except possibly for patients with large tears. Due to limitations of the evidence and because the result about large tears was from a subgroup analysis, the review conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD COMMENTARY: The questions and the inclusion criteria were clear for this substantial review. The search strategy was comprehensive in its consultation with a number of databases and additional material. However, the restriction to English language articles may mean that important studies might have been missed, and there was no evidence that publication bias was assessed. Other potential sources of bias were noted in the review process; specifically the apparent lack of independent (and non-blinded) assessment at the study selection, data extraction and validity assessment stages. Although the study details were reported extensively and the results were clearly synthesised according to research question, there was no clear summary of study quality. Together with the fact that many of the findings were based on studies with substantial heterogeneity and inconsistent levels of reporting, the reliability of the conclusions is unclear. However, the authors substantiated this as a likely reflection of practice and offered a comprehensive list of recommendations for future research.
In vitro and animal model data demonstrate that valproic acid (VPA) can ameliorate HIV-associated neurotoxicity. The authors conducted a pilot 10-week placebo-controlled study of VPA 250 mg twice daily in 22 HIV-infected individuals with (n = 16) and without (n = 6) cognitive impairment. VPA was safe and well tolerated, with trends toward improved neuropsychological performance and brain metabolism in the impaired subjects.
Fifty one individuals (37 male and 14 female) were asked to report on the social and behavioral circumstances related to their opiate drug use prior to and during a 90-day methadone detoxification treatment. Data were collected by means of a weekly structured interview. Questions were asked about each occasion of opiate use in the previous week with respect to time, source, cost, social circumstance, etc. Monitored urine samples were tested x 3/week to verify verbal reports. The study demonstrated beneficial effects of the detoxification treatment by showing dramatic decreases in rates and amounts of opiate drug use during treatment. Of perhaps greater significance, large scale changes were also noted in the frequency of use with others. This decline in use with others was most dramatic with respect to strangers and acquaintances. Implications of these observations for HIV transmission are discussed.
In 655 individuals receiving HIV postexposure prophylaxis (PEP), drug-induced aminotransferase alterations were frequent and severe in the nevirapine-including regimen, rare and mild-to-moderate in other combinations, and always reversible. Grade 3-4 incidence in protease inhibitor or nevirapine PEP was 0.5 and 25.0 per 100 person-months, respectively. Apart from nevirapine, continuing PEP appears to be safe even in the case of aminotransferase alterations. The usefulness of routine monitoring of liver function during PEP could be re-considered.
In this prospective, randomized, double-blind study the effect of the antifibrinolytic drug tranexamic acid was compared with that of placebo in 154 patients bleeding from verified benign lesions in the stomach and/or duodenum. Three out of 72 patients receiving tranexamic acid underwent emergency surgery, in contrast to 15 out of 82 in the placebo group (p = 0.010). Nineteen patients receiving placebo rebled during admission, as compared with 10 in the treatment group (p = 0.097). The blood transfusion requirement was significantly reduced by tranexamic acid (p = 0.018). Side effects were seen in six patients, of which an uncomplicated deep venous thrombosis was the most severe. It was concluded that tranexamic acid reduces the blood transfusion requirement and the need for emergency surgery in patients bleeding from a benign gastric or duodenal lesion.

Seventy-two patients complaining of abdominal pain were studied in a double blind trial with otilonium bromide (OB) (40 mg tid or placebo). In our patients we performed, before and after the treatment, a clinical evaluation (symptom variations) and functional studies (sigmoid manometry during bowel distension). As regards clinical parameters, otilonium bromide significantly reduced abdominal pain and bloating and significantly increased (p less than 0.02) the pain threshold. However the comparison with the placebo group did not show any difference between the two groups. Sigmoid motility during distension was significantly reduced (p less than 0.05) in OB group, whereas it did not change in the placebo group. We can conclude that, in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients, OB is able to improve symptoms and to reduce stimulated motor activity of the sigmoid.

CRD SUMMARY: The review found that antibiotics could be a first line of treatment for some children with subperiosteal orbital abscesses. Surgery was indicated for non-medial abscesses and patients with loss of visual acuity. Potential for biases in the review process and the low quality of the included studies mean that the authors' conclusion should be viewed with caution.
Describes the development of an assessment instrument and a training curriculum in orientation and mobility, to be used by families or friends of older blind and visually impaired adults, as well as by professionals in vision and related fields. A field test of the materials was conducted, using the assessment instrument in a pretest-posttest design, with the training curriculum and a structured control activity administered during intervention. A total of 35 Ss completed the program. Although the materials received enthusiastic support from the project's consultants and participants, no significant treatment or interaction effects were found.
Clinical management policies are meant to lead to the delivery of better health care. However, as we demonstrate in this review, having an oral or written venous thromboembolism prophylaxis policy does not necessarily lead to the majority of general surgical inpatients receiving the appropriate prophylaxis. We discovered, through prospective clinical audit, that for a clinical policy to be effective in delivering the appropriate health care, it must be repeatedly scrutinized and implemented in the correct manner. Only after several rounds of the audit cycle were we able to achieve the deliverance of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis to the majority of general surgical patients on our unit. This has wider implications, not just for the implementation of a venous thromboembolism prophylaxis policy, but also for all clinical management policies, and illustrates the importance of clinical audit in clinical practice.
An audit has been carried out, in a French general hospital, studying the use of heparins in preventive indications, to assess concordance between prescriptions and thrombotic risk, before and one year after the diffusion of national guidelines. Platelet monitoring frequency has also been studied. On a defined day, 550 patients were admitted, and 113 treated with preventive heparinotherapy (low molecular-weight heparin: 98 per cent). 52.2 per cent of patients received a correct regimen, while 4.4 per cent of underprescriptions and 43.4 per cent of overprescriptions were observed. Platelet monitoring protocol was respected in 44 per cent of cases, while it was insufficient for 41 per cent and not carried out in 15 per cent. The results of this study have been communicated to all the prescriptors. Another audit done one year later showed that 81 per cent of doses were adapted to the thrombotic risk, 2 per cent were too low, and 17 per cent too high. The efficiency of this kind of process shows that it should be generalized to all the sensitive therapeutic classes.
Vascular thrombosis is one of the main causes of early transplant failure in pediatric patients. This paper reports the results of an open trial of the low molecular weight heparin (Enoxaparine) used to prevent renal graft thrombosis in pediatric recipients with risk factors including donor or recipient age under 5 years, multiple arteries supplying the transplant, and positive history for recurrent thrombosis. During 1989, 42 of 67 children given a renal transplant were prophylactically treated with Enoxaparin. Only one transplant was lost to thrombosis among treated patients (1.5%), versus 9 transplants among 73 (12%) children who received their kidney in 1988 without prophylactic Enoxaparin. Risk factors were comparable in both groups of recipients. Enoxaparine therapy was associated with an increased rate of bleeding (12/42) without severe consequences. In conclusion, Enoxaparin is effective in preventing renal graft thrombosis. Availability of this prophylactic therapy makes it possible to use transplants removed from the youngest donors considered as inadequate by some groups.
Based on the principles of neuroplasticity, the purpose of this crossover study was to determine if improvement in upper extremity (UE) function and independence could be achieved in patients 6 months to 7 years poststroke following an outpatient rehabilitation program (supervised 1.5 hours per week for 8 weeks reinforced with home gloving unaffected side and attended, graded, repetitive sensory and motor training activities). Twenty-one subjects (right or left hemiparesis; able to walk 100 feet with or without a cane; partially opened and closed the hand; partially elevated the shoulder and elbow against gravity) were randomly assigned to Group A (sensory training 4 weeks, motor training 4 weeks) or Group B (motor training 4 weeks, sensory training 4 weeks). Greater than 20% (P < 0.01) improvement was measured in functional independence and UE function (fine motor, sensory discrimination, and musculoskeletal performance). Gains were hemispheric and training specific and maintained over 3 months. This study provides evidence documenting significant improvement in function in the late poststroke recovery period following 12 hours of supervised learning based sensory motor training.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the use of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors for pain following surgery. In terms of pain reduction and side-effects, the authors concluded that COX-2 inhibitors are similar to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The review does not give enough information to enable a confident judgement about how reliable or generalisable the conclusion is.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the sensitivity and specificity of D-dimer assays, and the variability of such measures among studies of the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). The authors appropriately concluded that, for excluding PE or DVT, a negative result on quantitative rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay is as diagnostically useful as a normal lung scan or negative duplex ultrasonography finding.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the accuracy of D-dimer assays for the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis. The authors concluded that there was no support for the use of stand-alone D-dimer assays. The limited search might have resulted in the omission of some relevant studies, and the results varied considerably among the studies identified. However, the authors' conclusions are likely to be robust.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined differences between trials assessing the effectiveness of interferon-alpha (IFN) for naive patients with chronic hepatitis C. The authors concluded that differences were mainly associated with different IFN regimens, but hepatitis C virus genotypes, study quality and reporting could also help explain them. The conclusions may not be very reliable as studies might have been missed and error and bias cannot be ruled out.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effectiveness of patient education on glycaemic control in adults with diabetes. The authors concluded that educational interventions have a modest improvement in glycaemic control, while face-to-face delivery, cognitive reframing teaching and exercise content increase the likelihood of success. The lack of a validity assessment and details of the control interventions weaken this conclusion.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the accuracy of ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) in diagnosing appendicitis in adults. The authors concluded that evidence suggests that CT is a sensitive and specific diagnostic test, but its routine use cannot be supported. The lack of reporting of review methods and the inclusion of generally poor-quality studies mean that the conclusions may be overstated.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review assessed the accuracy of computed tomography angiography (CTA) for imaging carotid and vertebral arteries. It found that CTA is both a sensitive and specific imaging technique for identifying severe atherosclerotic stenosis and occlusion of the carotid arteries. There was insufficient evidence to determine the accuracy of CTA in the setting of blunt or penetrating trauma.
CRD SUMMARY: The article reported a well-conducted systematic review assessing the accuracy of transoesophageal echocardiography, helical computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging for diagnosing thoracic aortic dissection (in comparison with findings at surgery, autopsy or angiography). The authors concluded that all three imaging modalities are equally reliable for confirming or ruling out thoracic aortic dissection; this conclusion accurately reflects the data presented.
CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the diagnostic accuracy and clinical utility of history taking and clinical tests for impingement or rotator cuff tears of the shoulder. No data on the accuracy of history taking were identified, and the majority of clinical tests were evaluated in single studies. The author appropriately concluded that the available evidence was limited.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the diagnostic performance of intracardiac echogenic foci, and evaluated whether they could be used in prenatal screening for trisomy 21. The authors concluded that the presence of these foci increases the risk of Down syndrome by five to seven times. However, since the quality of the primary studies was not assessed, these conclusions should be viewed with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that testing for C reactive protein was neither sufficiently sensitive to rule out nor specific to rule in both an infiltrate on chest radiograph and bacterial aetiology of lower respiratory tract infection. The authors highlighted the poor methodological quality of the few available studies in this area. The authors' conclusions are supported by the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: The review examined the potential of diffusion tensor imaging to detect differences in fractional anisotropy between schizophrenic and normal patients. The authors concluded that no consistent differences could be identified. The lack of review methods and absence of a quality assessment made it difficult to assess the evidence, but these conclusions appear reasonable given the limitations of the data presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the use of dipyridamole, with or without aspirin, for preventing stroke in patients with previous ischaemic cerebrovascular disease. The authors concluded that dipyridamole, with or without aspirin, reduced stroke recurrence in this population. The review appeared to support the authors' conclusions, but the incomplete reporting of review methods makes it difficult to confirm the robustness of the conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the benefits of disease-specific self-management programmes on health status and health resources in patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The authors concluded that disease-specific self-management can improve patients' health status and reduce physician visits and hospital use. Given that the conduct and reporting of the review had some flaws, the conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review considered the impact of treating anxiety to prevent relapse in alcohol symptoms in patients with both a diagnosed alcohol use disorder and anxiety. Although the authors could not affirm the need for specific treatment of anxiety in this patient group, they stated that medication and possibly cognitive-behavioural therapy could reduce anxiety. The reviewers' conclusions reflected limitations in the evidence base and highlighted the need for further research in this area.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of treatments for recently diagnosed chronic myeloid leukaemia. The authors concluded that interferon plus cytarabine is most effective for prolonging survival but has more adverse effects than other options. The review had methodological limitations and was based on a limited number of disparate trials, so the conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has a better discriminatory power than duplex ultrasound (DUS) for diagnosing 70-99% stenosis and is sensitive and specific compared with digital subtraction angiography (reference standard). It is difficult to evaluate the conclusions because of lack of detail about the included studies and analysis, and because comparisons of MRA and DUS were indirect.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated media-based patient education about anaesthesia prior to surgery. The authors concluded that videos and printed information on the process and risks of anaesthesia increased knowledge and reduced anxiety, but had no effect on patient satisfaction. This was a well-conducted review but, owing to insufficient information about the patients studied, it is difficult to determine in whom the intervention is effective.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of designated driver programmes on alcohol-impaired driving and alcohol-related crashes. The authors concluded that there is insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of population-based campaigns or incentive programmes based in drinking establishments. Overall, this was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions reflect the limited evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This meta-analysis investigated the effectiveness of psychodramatic techniques. The authors concluded that their findings appear to shed a positive light on the validity of psychodramatic techniques and they should be researched further and integrated into psychotherapy practice. The limited reporting of the included studies and methods used mean that these findings may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The use of abciximab as an adjuvant treatment to percutaneous coronary interventions for acute myocardial infarction reduced mortality, major cardiac events and revascularisation. This occurred with stenting, but not with balloon angioplasty. A 70 U/kg heparin bolus must be used to prevent major bleeding. The methodological quality of the included studies was not reported, so the results should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the quality and reporting of trials of newer antidepressant drugs for children. The new drugs were associated with a small benefit, which may have been exaggerated, and some serious adverse effects, which may have been downplayed. Many details of the methods used in the review were not reported, but the conclusions seem valid.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of antithrombotic agents in preventing central venous catheter-related thrombosis. The authors concluded that the limited evidence suggested that heparin did not significantly reduce thrombosis in patients receiviThis review assessed second-generation cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer's disease. The authors concluded that, compared with placebo, cholinesterase inhibitors significantly improve the therapeutic effect and increase adverse events. The conclusions are likely to be reliable, but the variation in the studies must be borne in mind.
CRD SUMMARY: This review analysed six trials on the effects of alosetron in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The authors concluded that alosetron can improve symptoms or decrease pain in female IBS patients without constipation. However, they also concluded that alosetron can have adverse effects, particularly constipation. The effects in men are unclear. These conclusions are appropriate given the evidence available.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy of light therapy in adults with mood disorders. The authors concluded that bright light therapy and dawn simulation for seasonal affective disorder and bright light therapy for non-seasonal depression show evidence of efficacy. It was not possible to determine the reliability of these conclusions since the review had some substantial methodological limitations.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared modern versus conventional dressings for leg ulcers and compared different types of modern dressings. The authors concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine the most effective type of dressing. Overall, this was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusion reflects the limited evidence from generally poor-quality studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy of post-operative epidural analgesia. The authors concluded that epidural analgesia (with the exception of thoracic epidural analgesia with opioids for thoracic surgery) was associated with significantly better post-operative analgesia than parental opioids. However, limitations in the review process and an inappropriate analysis mean that the conclusions cannot be considered reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy of recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH), testosterone and anabolic steroids in the treatment of HIV wasting. The authors concluded that there were no significant differences between the treatments in their efficacy for increasing lean body mass, but an approved dose of rhGH may be advantageous in terms of functional capacity and quality of life. Given the methodology of the review, the reliability of the results and conclusions is uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy of splinting for lateral epicondylitis. The authors concluded that there was some, but not conclusive, support for the use of splinting for lateral epicondylitis and that further research was required. There was limited evidence from the included small, generally flawed studies. Given the limitations of the evidence, the authors' tentative conclusions about efficacy appear appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors of this review found that prophylactic magnesium given around the time of cardiac surgery reduced the incidence of cardiac arrhythmias, but had no effect on length of hospital stay or mortality. Given the potential for publication and selection bias, and the pooling of diverse results, the conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the role of mechanical bowel preparation (MBP) in patients undergoing colorectal surgery. The authors concluded that there was no evidence to support the use of MBP in these patients, and that MBP may actually be harmful. The potential for selection bias and the generally poor quality of the included studies mean that the conclusions should be treated with caution.
A meta-analysis of six randomised trials demonstrated that intensive followup in colorectal cancer was associated with an absolute reduction in all-cause 5-year mortality of 10% (95% confidence interval (CI): 4-16)--however, only two percent (95% CI: 0-5) was attributable to cure from salvage re-operations. We postulate that other factors, such as increased psychological well-being and/or altered lifestyle, and/or improved treatment of coincidental disease may contribute to the remaining lives saved, and form important future research questions.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed single- and multidose intramuscular methotrexate regimens for the medical treatment of ectopic pregnancy. The authors concluded that methotrexate regimens have high success rates and that multidose regimens are more effective than single-dose regimens. The evidence supporting the author's conclusions is not strong.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the association between menopausal hormone regimens and the risk of breast cancer (BC) over time. The authors concluded that hormone therapy, particularly oestrogen-progestin therapy, has increased the risk of BC in recent years. Poor reporting of review methods, no assessment of study quality, and the synthesis of studies of differing designs make the reliability of the conclusions uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated rapid diagnostic tests for ruling out malaria in non-immune travellers. The authors concluded that histidine-rich protein-2-based tests are a useful adjunct to microscopy in excluding Plasmodium falciparum infection in centres without major expertise in tropical medicine, but more research is required for other species. The review was generally well conducted and the conclusions should be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy of angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) in patients with chronic heart failure and high-risk acute myocardial infarction. The authors concluded that there was no difference between ARBs and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in reducing all-cause mortality and hospitalisation for heart failure. The review was relatively well-conducted, although the authors did not consider differences in the dosages evaluated across the included studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the efficacy of different proton-pump inhibitors (omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole and esomeprazole) in standard triple therapy for Helicobacter pylori eradication. The authors concluded that there appears to be no difference in the efficacy of different proton-pump inhibitors. The authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the use of bare metal stents and drug-eluting stents (paclitaxel or sirolimus) for coronary artery stenosis. There was no difference in effect on mortality or overall myocardial infarction. The authors concluded that the treatments were similar and excluded, with confidence, the possibility of any clinically relevant differences. These conclusions are supported by the data presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of state driver improvement programmes on subsequent traffic violations and accidents. The authors concluded that driver improvement interventions, particularly licence suspension or revocation, reduce the risk of accidents and violations. The robustness of the conclusions are weakened by methodological and reporting limitations to the review and unexplained variability in the meta-analysis.
CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to evaluate the effect of professional fluoride varnish treatments on caries prevention. The authors concluded that there is limited evidence that professional fluoride varnish treatment has a caries-preventive effect in permanent teeth in children and adolescents. Evidence in adults and children with primary dentition was inconclusive. The results were inconsistent across studies and this weakened the evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review used meta-analysis and modelling to predict age-specific long-term prognosis after allograft aortic replacement (ARR) in adults. The authors concluded that ARR has an age-related limited durability, which leads to an increased risk of lifetime structural valve failure that requires reoperation in younger patients. Limitations in the reporting of the review process and data used to populate the model mean that the results may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review assessed whether the labour admission test (cardiotocography) improves outcomes for the mother and child compared with auscultation only. There was no evidence that the labour admission test is beneficial in low-risk women and the test was found to be a poor predictor of adverse outcomes. The conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This well conducted review evaluated the use of therapeutic hypothermia as a neuroprotective strategy after severe traumatic brain injury in adults. Although therapeutic hypothermia might reduce the risks of death and poor neurological outcome, the authors' stated that there was insufficient evidence to recommend its routine use in clinical practice. The authors' were appropriately cautious in their conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that prophylactic cranial irradiation may prevent brain metastases and increase disease-free and overall survival in people with small-cell lung cancer who have achieved complete response after induction therapy. There was insufficient evidence to recommend an optimal dose. Although information on the methods used was sparse, the findings are likely to be valid.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review assessed the effect of respiratory physiotherapy on preventing pulmonary complications following cardiac surgery. The authors concluded that the usefulness of respiratory physiotherapy following cardiac surgery remains unproven, that the quality of existing trials is low, and that large-scale trials with a no-intervention control group are needed.
CRD SUMMARY: The review compared the diagnostic accuracy of echographic methods (Simpson's rule, wall motion index, visual assessment) with contrast or radionuclide ventriculography for the assessment of left ventricular systolic function. The conclusion that echocardiography provides moderately accurate assessments appears reliable.
OBJECTIVES: To assess whether motorcycle ambulances placed at rural health centers are a more effective method of reducing referral delay for obstetric emergencies than a car ambulance at the district hospital, and to compare investment and operating costs with those of a 4 wheel drive car ambulance at the district hospital.
METHODS: Motorcycle ambulances were placed at 3 remote rural health centers in Malawi. Data were collected over a 1-year period, from October 2001 to September 2002, using logbooks, cashbooks, referral forms, and maternity registers.
RESULTS: Depending on the site, median referral delay was reduced by 2-4.5 hours (35%-76%). Purchase price of a motorcycle ambulance was 19 times cheaper than for a car ambulance. Annual operating costs were US dollars 508, which was almost 24 times cheaper than for a car ambulance.
CONCLUSIONS: In resource-poor countries motorcycle ambulances at rural health centers are a useful means of referral for emergency obstetric care and a relatively cheap option for the health sector.

Ten patients who underwent conventional coronary angiography (CA) were examined with both 8- and 16-slice multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) angiography within 6 months, and visibility and image quality of 16-slice MDCT-CA were compared with those of 8-slice MDCT-CA directly. In 136 segments determined by conventional CA, 101 (74.3%) and 126 (92.6%) segments were judged assessable by 8- and 16-slice MDCT-CA, respectively. Segment visibility in the right coronary and left circumflex arteries, as well as distal segments and small segments with diameters of <3.0 mm, was higher using 16-slice MDCT-CA than that of 8-slice MDCT-CA. As causes for invisibility in segments considered to be invisible, adjacent structures, as well as small diameters, were reduced by 16-slice MDCT-CA, suggesting that high spatial resolution contributes to higher visibility; however, nonassessable segments due to extensive calcium by 8-slice MDCT-CA were also judged nonassessable by 16-slice MDCT-CA.

Thirty-one patients, mean age 60 years (range 45-80 years), with a typical history and objective symptoms of intermittent claudication with a reported maximal walking distance less than 500 m, were included in a cross-over study. After a one month's run-in period on placebo, the patients were randomized into two groups: one group started with flunarizine (5 mg t.i.d.) and the other with pentoxifylline (400 mg t.i.d.). The treatment lasted 3 months, whereafter the medications were changed. The trial followed a double-blind design. The median of the maximal walking distance was 255 m after the placebo period, increasing significantly (p less than 0.01) during both medication periods: by 43% and 18% during flunarizine and pentoxifylline, respectively. No changes were recorded in the ankle systolic blood pressure ratio ( ASBP -ratio) after placebo or either medication period. Red cell rigidity (Pmax), which was initially elevated, decreased significantly (p less than 0.05) during both medication periods, but there were no significant differences between the two drugs. No changes were found in whole blood or plasma viscosity. We conclude that the decrease in red cell rigidity may have contributed to the increased walking distance.

A trial of intravenous followed by oral propranolol, started within 4 h of onset of suspected myocardial infarction and continued over 27 h, was carried out in 735 patients; 364 received propranolol, 371 were controls. Ventricular fibrillation during the first 48 h after entry to the trial occurred in 2 treated patients and in 14 controls (p = 0.006). Rates of hospital mortality, complications other than ventricular fibrillation, and progression from threatened to completed infarction did not differ between treated and control patients. Ventricular fibrillation was not apparently prevented by prior beta-blocker treatment, which was not a reason for exclusion from the trial. This intravenous/oral propranolol regimen seems to prevent ventricular fibrillation due to evolving myocardial infarction.

BACKGROUND:   Education groups for people with schizophrenia have tended to concentrate on compliance with medication. This study examines impact on social behaviour and quality of life.  METHOD:   A catchment-wide service was set up for community-based patients. Patients who indicated an interest in education groups were randomly allocated to either an education group or a waiting list control group. Those who attended groups were compared with the control group.  RESULTS:   About one-quarter of community-based patients showed interest in attending education groups. Those who attended showed no change in mental state or compliance with medication (already high) but significant gains in quality of life, social functioning and social networks.  CONCLUSIONS:   For patients who choose to attend education groups significant gains in social functioning and quality of life are possible without specific skills training.
Methadone maintenance is associated with improved adherence to antiretroviral therapies among HIV-positive illicit drug users; however, little information exists on whether adherence is associated with different drug abuse treatment modalities. Using longitudinal data from the Women's Interagency HIV Study, we evaluated the relationship between drug abuse treatment modality and adherence to antiretroviral therapies. In prospective analyses, individuals who reported accessing any drug abuse treatment program were more likely to report adherence to antiretroviral regimens > or = 95% of the time (AOR = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.01-1.92). Involvement in either a medication-based or medication-free program was similarly associated with improved adherence. Drug abuse treatment programs, irrespective of modality, are associated with improved adherence to antiretroviral therapies among drug users. Concerted efforts to enroll individuals with drug use histories in treatment programs are warranted to improve HIV disease outcomes.

This article presents data from a population-based, random-digit dialing telephone survey of 1228 employed adults in Washington State, conducted 1989 through 1990. Eighty-one percent of men and 91% of women reported work-site smoking restrictions. Employees in work sites with no-smoking policies were less likely to be current smokers; men in work sites with policies restricting smoking smoked fewer cigarettes on both workdays and nonworkdays. Forty-eight percent of male and 53% of female smokers reported reduced smoking as a result of work-site policy. Work-site smoking policies, intended to protect against smoke exposure, may also reduce employee smoking.

The authors used a double-blind crossover design to observe the effect of transdermally administered nicotine on the smoking behavior of 13 psychiatric patients who were not trying to stop smoking. The patients smoked significantly fewer cigarettes while receiving nicotine than while receiving placebo. These data suggest that transdermally administered nicotine can be a useful adjunct in treating nicotine-addicted psychiatric patients in a non-smoking environment.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that antibiotic prescription to individuals in primary care was associated with antibiotic resistance in urinary or respiratory tract bacteria up to 12 months later. Despite some limitations in the evidence base, the review was well conducted and the conclusions appear likely to be reliable.
A Controlled, double-blind study was performed to compare the effects of levamisole and placebo in eighteen patients with recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Levamisole is a drug which enhances defective cellular immune responses. It was administered in a flexible dosage schedule: 50 mg. three times daily for three consecutive days at the start of an aphthous lesion but with an interval of at least 2 weeks between courses of therapy. Placebo consisted of pills that were identical in appearance, taken according to the same schedule. Statistical evaluation showed decreased frequency of lesions, shorter duration, and diminished pain of lesions in the group receiving levamisole. Subsequent follow-up in an open trial confirmed these results.

Four hundred and fifty three healthy children immunized with a course of hepatitis B vaccine beginning at birth were tested at 10-11 years of age for persistence of anti-hepatitis B-S antigen antibody (anti-HBs); and responses of children without protective antibody to different doses of hepatitis B vaccine booster were evaluated. Although nearly 42% of them were not seroprotected, but most of boosted subjects (87.3%) retained robust immunologic memory and rapidly retained a protective anti-HBs antibody titer of at least 10 IU/L after booster vaccination.

During a 20-day, double-blind, placebo-controlled, fixed-dose outpatient trial of carbamazepine (either 200 mg or 400 mg) for potential anticocaine treatment effects in volunteers who were unmotivated for treatment and who lacked any external coercion for cocaine abstinence, we monitored cardiovascular effects in 30 subjects on a daily basis. All individual cardiovascular measures obtained were within clinically normal limits. Corrected QT interval under carbamazepine was shorter than under placebo condition, although both were in the normal range. Systolic pressure was elevated by 2.1 mm Hg. No differences in pulse rate were found. With carbamazepine and concurrent ad lib cocaine use, heart rate was significantly, although not clinically, elevated (mean increase = 2.3 beats/minute). The analysis of these approximately 600 observations indicates that carbamazepine in cocaine users, alone and in combination with ad lib street crack use, causes no clinically significant cardiovascular effects.

Body measurements and determinations were made of normal children age 8 3/4 yr. Anthropometric indices most highly correlated with percentage fat as determined by body density were the sum of four skinfolds, relative weight, and triceps skinfold thickness. Girls had a significantly higher percentage of fat than boys. Percentage fat at this age was compared to longitudinal activity scores (based on 1-day activity records) obtained from 6 months to the current age. There was no significant correlation of activity with fatness in girls. In boys, activity at 3 and 4 yr had a significant negative correlation with fatness at age 8; activity at age 8 was not correlated. Relative-leanness-fatness was better related to past than current activity. Comparison of longitudinal activity scores revealed a continuity of activity patterns for short intervals (e.g., 1 yr), but over longer periods (e.g., 4 or more yr) the effect diminished.

BACKGROUND: Delirium has recently been shown as a predictor of death, increased cost, and longer duration of stay in ventilated patients. Sedative and analgesic medications relieve anxiety and pain but may contribute to patients' transitioning into delirium.
METHODS: In this cohort study, the authors designed a priori an investigation to determine whether sedative and analgesic medications independently increased the probability of daily transition to delirium. Markov regression modeling (adjusting for 11 covariates) was used in the evaluation of 198 mechanically ventilated patients to determine the probability of daily transition to delirium as a function of sedative and analgesic dose administration during the previous 24 h.
RESULTS: Lorazepam was an independent risk factor for daily transition to delirium (odds ratio, 1.2 [95% confidence interval, 1.1-1.4]; P = 0.003), whereas fentanyl, morphine, and propofol were associated with higher but not statistically significant odds ratios. Increasing age and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II scores were also independent predictors of transitioning to delirium (multivariable P values < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Lorazepam administration is an important and potentially modifiable risk factor for transitioning into delirium even after adjusting for relevant covariates.

The purpose of this study was to compare cognitive-processing therapy (CPT) with prolonged exposure and a minimal attention condition (MA) for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression. One hundred seventy-one female rape victims were randomized into 1 of the 3 conditions, and 121 completed treatment. Participants were assessed with the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale, the PTSD Symptom Scale, the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, the Beck Depression Inventory, and the Trauma-Related Guilt Inventory. Independent assessments were made at pretreatment, posttreatment, and 3 and 9 months posttreatment. Analyses indicated that both treatments were highly efficacious and superior to MA. The 2 therapies had similar results except that CPT produced better scores on 2 of 4 guilt subscales.

The effect of magnesium supplementation on blood pressure, erythrocyte cation metabolism, and serum lipids was evaluated in 13 patients with mild hypertension. After randomization and a 3-wk placebo run-in period, seven patients received 40 mmol Mg aspartate (20 mmol elemental Mg twice daily) and six received placebo for 3 mo. In comparison with placebo treatment, magnesium aspartate therapy had no effect on blood pressure, lipid concentrations, or erythrocyte cation metabolism. These results demonstrate that in magnesium-repleted hypertensive subjects, magnesium supplementation does not affect blood pressure or lipids probably because magnesium has no effect on cellular cation metabolism in magnesium-replete individuals.

Motivational interviewing (MI) is a promising brief intervention for people who wish to cut down or quit gambling. The study was a randomized clinical trial that tested the efficacy of a single face-to-face MI compared with a control interview (CI) for reducing gambling behaviours in individuals who expressed concerns about their gambling. Eighty-one media recruited gamblers were followed at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months post-intervention. At 12 months post-intervention participants in the MI condition spent significantly less money on gambling per month, gambled fewer days per month, and reported significantly less distress than participants in the CI condition. Participants in both conditions showed overall reduction in gambling problem severity.

We prospectively randomized 233 patients with unstable trochanteric hip fractures for treatment with a 120 degrees fixed angle blade-plate having a buttress rod (group A, n 111) or a 135 degrees compression hip screw (group B, n 122). The minimum follow-up time was 1 year. The ratio of technical failure was 9% in group A and 19% in group B (p = 0.06). 79 (87%) fractures in group A and 65 (68%) fractures in group B healed without any complication (p = 0.003). Malunion occurred in 2 cases in group A and in 15 cases in group B (p = 0.002).

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary hypertensive crises (PHTC) are a major cause of morbidity and mortality after congenital heart surgery. Inhaled nitric oxide is frequently used as rescue therapy. We did a randomised double-blind study to investigate the role of routinely administered inhaled nitric oxide to prevent pulmonary hypertension in infants at high risk.
METHODS: We enrolled 124 infants (64 male, 60 female; median age 3 months [IQR 1-5]), 76% with large ventricular or atrioventricular septal defects, who had high pulmonary flow, pressure, or both, and were undergoing corrective surgery for congenital heart disease. They were randomly assigned continuous low-dose inhaled nitric oxide (n=63) or placebo (n=61) from surgery until just before extubation. We measured the numbers of PHTC, time on study gas, and hours spent in intensive care. Analysis was done by intention to treat.
FINDINGS: Compared with placebo, infants receiving inhaled nitric oxide had fewer PHTC (median four [IQR 0-12] vs seven [1-19]; relative risk, unadjusted 0.66, p<0.001, adjusted for dispersion 0.65, p=0.045) and shorter times until criteria for extubation were met (80 [38-121] vs 112 h [63-164], p=0.019). Time taken to wean infants off study gas was 35% longer in the nitric oxide group than in the placebo group (p=0.19), but the total time on the study gas was still 30 h shorter for the nitric oxide group (87 [43-125] vs 117 h [67-168], p=0.023). No important toxic effects arose.
INTERPRETATION: In infants at high risk of pulmonary hypertension, routine use of inhaled nitric oxide after congenital heart surgery can lessen the risk of pulmonary hypertensive crises and shorten the postoperative course, with no toxic effects.

The role of inhaled nitric oxide in the immediate post-bypass period after surgical repair of congenital heart disease is uncertain. In a controlled, randomized, double-blind study, we tested the hypothesis that inhaled nitric oxide (NO) would reduce pulmonary hypertension immediately after surgical repair of congenital heart disease in 40 patients with preoperative evidence of pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary arterial pressure [MPAP] exceeding 50% of mean systemic arterial pressure [MSAP]). Patients were then followed in the intensive care unit (ICU) to document the incidence of severe pulmonary hypertension. Of the patients, 36% (n = 13) emerged from bypass with MPAP > 50% MSAP. In these patients, inhaled NO reduced MPAP by 19% (P = 0.008) versus an increase of 9% in the placebo group. No effect on MPAP was observed in patients emerging from bypass without pulmonary hypertension (n = 23). Inhaled NO was required five times in the ICU, always in the patients who had emerged from cardiopulmonary bypass with pulmonary hypertension (5 of 13 [38%] versus 0 of 23). We conclude that, in infants and children undergoing congenital heart surgery, inhaled NO selectively reduces MPAP in patients who emerge from cardiopulmonary bypass with pulmonary hypertension and has no effect on those who emerge without it. Implications: In a randomized double-blind study, inhaled nitric oxide selectively reduced pulmonary artery pressures in pediatric patients who developed pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the lungs) immediately after cardiopulmonary bypass and surgical repair.

OBJECTIVE: This double-blind randomised controlled trial compared the effects of tap water and normal saline on the healing and infection rates of acute and chronic wounds.
METHOD: The trial was conducted in two metropolitan community health centres in New South Wales, Australia. Thirty-five patients with 49 acute or chronic wounds were randomised to receive wound irrigation with either normal saline or tap water.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis demonstrated there was no significant difference between the infection and healing rates in wounds irrigated with normal saline or tap water.
CONCLUSION: Although the small sample size is a limitation of this study, the researchers conclude that drinkable tap water appears to provide a safe alternative to normal saline for wound cleansing and may be preferred by some patients.

Studies of relative LAAM-methadone preference have indicated that a significant proportion of patients prefer levo-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM). The present study was designed to determine whether this preference is associated with better treatment outcomes. Sixty-two stable methadone patients participated in a randomised crossover clinical trial. They received LAAM (alternate days) and methadone (daily) for 3 months each, followed by a further 6-month period during which they were free to choose between the drugs. LAAM maintenance was associated with a lower rate of heroin use than methadone maintenance based on analysis of morphine concentration in hair and equivalent health outcomes. The majority of subjects showed a preference for LAAM (n=27, 69.2%) rather than methadone (n=12, 30.8%). The main reasons given for the LAAM preference were that it produced less withdrawal (39.3%), fewer side effects (28.5%), less craving for heroin (17.9%), and entailed fewer pick-up days (14.3%). Those who chose LAAM had lower levels of heroin use during LAAM maintenance, significantly better outcomes on two sub-scales of the SF-36 (Vitality and Mental Health), and reported that they felt more normal and that they were 'held' better when on LAAM. For those who chose methadone, there were no differences in outcomes between the LAAM and methadone maintenance periods. Preference for LAAM is associated with treatment outcomes as good or better than those with methadone.

Retention of patients in methadone treatment was studied in a cohort of 238 heroin addicts who entered maintenance programmes between February 1986 and August 1987. All subjects had been assessed at a centralised unit and referred to one of two other units for maintenance. Of the ten client characteristics that we analysed, three--a history of imprisonment, a history of dependence on barbiturates or benzodiazepines and employment status at entry--were included with "clinic" and maximum dose of methadone in the Cox regression models. Allowing for the other four variables, the maximum daily dose of methadone dispensed during the study period was a highly significant predictor of retention (P less than 0.00001). With maximum dose stratified into three levels--less than 60 mg, 60-79 mg, 80+ mg--and with the lowest stratum used as the baseline, the relative risk (RR) of leaving treatment was halved (RR 0.47, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.33-0.67) for subjects receiving 60-79 mg, and halved again (RR 0.21, 95% CI 0.12-0.38) for those who received 80+ mg. Clinic dosage policies contribute significantly to retention in methadone maintenance treatment. Clinics need to develop dosage policies in negotiation with individual patients.

This study represents the largest clinical trial reported to date that demonstrated the efficacy of buprenorphine for opioid dependence treatment (Johnson et al. 1992). Although the study design was adequate to demonstrate differences between treatment groups, there has not been a consensus regarding the most appropriate method for analyzing various outcome measures of this and similar studies. To present a comprehensive review of these methods, other chapters in this monograph focus on various analytical techniques for assessing one of these measures--urine toxicology screens--for illicit opioids.

The authors report a random-assignment, double-blind crossover trial comparing alprazolam and placebo in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Ten patients fulfilling DSM-III criteria for PTSD completed 5 weeks of treatment on each agent. Improvement in anxiety symptoms was significantly greater during alprazolam treatment but modest in extent. Symptoms specific to PTSD were not significantly altered. The impact of nonspecific symptomatic effects on the outcome of drug trials in PTSD is considered.

Patient safety is a major concern in the NHS, and medicines management is a vital aspect of this. This article describes one patient's journey through healthcare from the perspective of how medicines are managed. The patient's journey starts with an emergency admission to hospital, followed by a 10 day inpatient stay, including a brief stay in the high dependency unit, through to discharge. Adverse events or near misses are highlighted, showing key areas where nurses need to take action to ensure or improve patient safety.

BACKGROUND: Studies comparing the procedural and clinical outcomes of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation (AF) guided by CartoMerge and that by Carto have achieved mixed results (Carto, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA). We collected these studies and conducted a meta-analysis to determine whether CartoMerge results in better procedural and clinical outcomes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three randomized controlled trials and two controlled observational studies were collected for analysis. The clinical and procedural outcomes of interest were AF recurrence after catheter ablation, major complications, procedure durations, and fluoroscopy time. Meta-analysis was performed using RevMan 5.0.18 software (The Cochrane Collaboration, Copenhagen, Denmark) and pooled estimates of effect were reported as risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CI). The overall results of this meta-analysis indicate that catheter ablation for AF guided by CartoMerge is insignificantly associated with a decreased risk of recurrences (RR = 0.76; 95% CI: 0.55-1.04; P = 0.09) and major complications (RR = 0.73; 95% CI: 0.37-1.45; P = 0.37) compared with that by Carto.
CONCLUSION: The image integration using CartoMerge guiding catheter ablation for AF does not improve the main clinical outcomes significantly compared with that by Carto in centers with experienced operators.

We developed a secure, web-based system for parent-professional and inter-professional communication. The aim was to improve communication in the care of children with cerebral palsy. We conducted a six-month trial of the system in three Dutch health-care regions. The participants were the parents of 30 cerebral palsy patients and 120 professional staff involved in their care. Information about system usage was extracted from the system's database. The experience of the parents and professionals was evaluated by a questionnaire after six months. The system proved to be technically robust and reliable. A total of 21 parents (70%) and 66 professionals (55%) used the system. The parents submitted 111 questions and 59 responses, with a mean of 5 questions (range 1-17) and 3 responses (range 1-9) per parent. The professionals submitted 79 questions and 237 responses, with a mean of 2 questions (range 1-8) and 4 responses (range 1-23) per professional. Most parents (95%) and some professionals (30%) reported value in using the system, which ranged from efficiency and accessibility to flexibility and transparency. The web-based communication system was technically feasible and produced improved parent-professional and inter-professional communication. It may be especially valuable if frequent interventions or consultations about a child's care are required, involving complex care networks of different professionals and organisations.

OBJECTIVE: To compare oral ibuprofen with intravenous ibuprofen for closure of patent ductus arteriosus in very low birth weight (VLBW) preterm infants.
STUDY DESIGN: In a prospective, randomized study, 102 VLBW preterm infants with patent ductus arteriosus received either intravenous or oral ibuprofen at an initial dose of 10 mg/kg, followed by 5 mg/kg at 24 and 48 hours. The success rate and evaluation of renal tolerance using cystatin-C were the major outcomes.
RESULTS: Patent ductus arteriosus closure rate was significantly higher with oral ibuprofen (84.6% versus 62%) after the first course of the treatment (P = .011). The cystatin-C level increased significantly after treatment in the oral group (P = .001), but did not change with intravenous ibuprofen (P = .4).
CONCLUSIONS: Oral ibuprofen is more effective than intravenous ibuprofen for ductal closure in VLBW infants. The increase in the cystatin-C level with oral treatment suggests that patients with borderline renal function should be evaluated and followed closely.

This article reviews 44 operations research projects aiming to improve reproductive health services in Guatemala, conducted by the Population Council from 1988 to 2001. It documents the experience of the research programme, traces the extent to which research results are identifiable in existing programmes, and analyses factors influencing utilization. Utilization of research results occurs as a gradual process of information sharing, where researchers influence decision-makers through a continual stream of information rather than a single set of findings. Utilization depends on leadership, collaborative planning and implementation, close monitoring, and feasible research designs, among other factors. To influence policy formulation, organizations should form enduring links among institutions and develop critical research skills among personnel who collaborate with or manage service programmes. To understand how operations research affects policy and programme change, one must consider not just individual projects, but rather the synergistic impact of multiple projects on a broad range of themes over time.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed eosinophilic oesophagitis, including the efficacy of five different therapies, in adults. The authors reported that one trial with corticosteroids before bougienage may reduce active inflammation and the complication rate. However, the authors' findings should be not be relied upon, as this was a very poorly reported review that included a large number of very small, poor-quality studies.
Twenty patients with Colles' fractures were treated with a functional brace that allows wrist motion. The result was compared with a similar group of patients treated with a plaster cast. Dorsal displacement of the fracture was less and wrist function was better in the brace group. Swelling of the hand during the early stages was observed in the brace group; and because this may necessitate brace adjustment, increased medical supervision is necessary for this period.

BACKGROUND: A beneficial effect of selegiline (L-deprenyl) in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been reported in several clinical studies.
METHODS: The brain tissue from 17 deceased patients, members of a double-blind clinical trial to assess the potential benefit of selegiline in AD, were analysed.
FINDINGS: In our study, the decrease in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores during the progress of the disease had been significantly influenced by selegiline treatment. Prior to death, the MMSE scores were significantly higher in those patients receiving selegiline than in those receiving placebo. However, according to our results, none of the lesions critical for AD diagnosis, such as counts of senile/neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles or beta-A4 load, were influenced by the selegiline treatment.
INTERPRETATION: In conclusion, according to our study, mechanisms other than neuronal degeneration seen as lesions critical for AD diagnosis are influenced by selegiline treatment, leading to the functional benefit found in AD.

Twenty-seven patients with rheumatoid arthritis underwent cementless total hip arthroplasty from 1982 through 1989. We performed all operations through a posterior approach. Postoperatively, patient convalescence consisted of ambulation with crutches, followed by weight bearing as tolerated until pain and discomfort subsided. We contacted 25 (92.5%) patients for follow-up. Combined, these patients received 34 total hip arthroplasties. The patients ranged in age from 14 to 69 years old with a mean age of 42.9 years. The follow-up period ranged from two to eight years with a mean of five and one-half years. The mean preoperative total Harris hip score was 48 (range 31-68). The mean total Harris hip score at latest follow-up was 80 (range 44-95). Hip pain status and functional ability were important indicators of treatment efficacy. The lower incidence of pain, as well as the increase in functional abilities experienced by the patients, suggests that cementless total hip arthroplasty is a preferable alternative to fixed arthroplasty in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

OBJECTIVES: Data from the 1992, 1993, and 1994 Monitoring the Future Surveys were used to investigate the differential effects of cigarette price on the intensity of youth cigarette smoking.
METHODS: Respondents were classified into non-smokers; individuals who smoked less than one cigarette per day; individuals who smoked one to five cigarettes per day; individuals who smoked one-half pack a day; and individuals who smoked one pack or more a day. A Threshold of Change Model was estimated with information on cigarette prices as the main explanatory variables.
RESULTS: Dummy variables indicating medium and high prices were found to have varying effects on different levels of smoking intensity, even though higher prices were associated with lower smoking in all cases. The differences are more striking in the high-price case. The effects of higher prices are largest at the heaviest smoking levels.
CONCLUSION: Cigarette prices are an effective tool to discourage youth smoking. The differential effects of cigarette price on smoking intensity warrant further investigation.

Evaluated the ability of social-psychological factors, measured in adolescence, to predict young-adult smoking outcomes. Results showed substantial continuity in the antecedents of adolescent and young-adult smoking but important discontinuities as well. Beliefs in the negative social consequences of smoking and beliefs about academic success and independence were important to adolescent but not to adult smoking. Conversely, beliefs in the negative health consequences of smoking were more important to adult smoking than to adolescent smoking. Results also showed an appreciable amount of smoking onset after the high school years, as well as an appreciable amount of adolescent smoking that did not persist into young adulthood. Antecedents of late-onset smoking and of nonpersistent smoking are described.

In 1993-94, fifty-five clients at an adolescent residential drug treatment facility with an innovative tobacco prevention, education and cessation program reported their tobacco attitudes, intentions, and behavior at admission and discharge. Of entering clients, 93% were current smokers and 93% felt the facility should help clients quit smoking. Clients interested in quitting increased from 61% at admission to 87% at discharge, as measured by the precontemplation/contemplation ladder of Rustin and Tate (1993). Clients who wanted to immediately quit smoking increased from 15% to 29%. Sixty-five percent of the teens studied said the tobacco-free activities were extremely helpful. At discharge, 16% of the smokers reported having quit tobacco and all four nonsmokers remained smoke-free. During the preceding year there was a naturally occurring quit rate of 1%. As a result of this work, the facility required residential clients to be nicotine-free as of July 1996.

Recent post-marketing surveillance reports have confirmed the benign safety profile and lack of organ toxicity shown by piracetam during its 25 years of clinical usage. Tolerance has proved equally good with the more recent use of larger doses (up to 24 g/day) for the long-term control of cortical myoclonus and when given intravenously to patients with acute stroke. This paper provides a brief review of these findings and records the safety of piracetam as found in the Piracetam in Acute Stroke Study (PASS), a randomized multicenter placebo-controlled study in 927 patients with acute ischemic stroke. Patients receive one intravenous bolus injection of placebo or 12 g piracetam, piracetam 12 g daily for 4 weeks and maintenance treatment for 8 weeks. The major results have been reported (De Deyn et al., Stroke 28 [1997] 2347-2352). Safety was assessed taking into account adverse events including abnormal laboratory test results and mortality. Death within 12 weeks occurred more frequently in the piracetam group but the difference from placebo was not significant. Of many potential risk, prognostic and treatment-related factors examined by logistic regression, 6 contributed significantly to death of which the most important were initial severity of stroke and age. Neither treatment nor any treatment-related factor contributed significantly to death. Adverse events were similar in frequency, type and severity in piracetam and placebo groups. Events of cerebral, non-cerebral and uncertain origin likewise occurred with similar frequency. Few patients discontinued because of adverse events. There was no difference between treatments in the frequency of events associated with bleeding, including hemorrhagic transformation of infarction. An important finding was that, of 31 patients with primary hemorrhagic stroke enrolled, 3 piracetam-treated patients died compared with 6 on placebo. The results suggest that piracetam in high dosage may be given to patients with acute stroke without significant adverse effects.

Using a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design, we studied the effect of bromocriptine (15 mg daily) in 20 men with chronic nonfluent aphasia. The study was conducted over a 28-week period in two phases. In phase I, the patients received either bromocriptine or placebo; in phase II the treatments were crossed over. We evaluated each patient's language and nonverbal cognitive skills at the beginning and end of each phase and 6 weeks after completion of phase II. When compared with placebo treatment, bromocriptine did not significantly improve the patient's speech fluency, language content, overall degree of aphasia severity, or nonverbal cognitive abilities. Based on these results, bromocriptine is not recommended as monotherapy for the treatment of chronic nonfluent aphasia.

Using a randomized, double blind group comparison, the efficacy and tolerance of piracetam as an additional therapy of hydroxyethyl starch, venous infusion and low dose heparin treatment, which are the basis of therapy in our hospital, has been studied in patients displaying acute cerebral ischemia. A total of 56 patients were enrolled, of whom 27 were given piracetam and 29 served as a control during a 28-day period. Using single photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) analysis, we observed that in 23 piracetam-treated patients (85.2%) a reduction in the area of brain regions displaying an impaired flow rate occurred (P < 0.001; Fisher's exact two-sided test). Only six of placebo-treated patients (20.7%) showed an improved flow rate. Analysis of the recorded computer tomography map gave an improvement coefficient >2 (flow rate marginally or better improved) for 23 piracetam patients as compared with 5 placebo patients (P < 0.001, Uleman test).

Dexamethasone is often given to intubated neonates to facilitate successful extubation. To study the effects of dexamethasone on pulmonary function immediately following extubation, we conducted a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled trial in 51 infants. All infants had been intubated for a minimum of 3 days but no more than 30 days. Mean weight at extubation was 2.41 kg in treated infants, 2.25 kg in control infants. When infants were deemed ready for extubation, dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg/dose or an equal volume of normal saline was given in three doses 8 hours apart. The final dose was given 1 hour before extubation. Esophageal pressure, air flow integrated to tidal volume (Vt), respiratory rate, and heart rate were measured before extubation, immediately following extubation, and every 20 minutes for 80 minutes. Total pulmonary resistance (RTP), dynamic lung compliance (CL), and minute ventilation (VE) were calculated. Forty-two infants completed the study; 19 infants received dexamethasone and 23 received placebo. There was no difference between the two groups in gestational age, weight at study, or length of intubation. Vt, RTP, VE, and CL were not significantly different between the two groups over time; however, RTP increased over time in the placebo group. Heart rate was significantly lower in the dexamethasone group. We conclude that dexamethasone appears to have limited effect on pulmonary function immediately following extubation in the population studied. Further studies should evaluate the drug effect beginning at least 1 hour after extubation.

A total of 78 patients took part in a double-blind randomized comparison of the efficacy, acceptability and tolerance of a new antifungal terconazole (R-42470) (cream 0.4%) with the well established and clinically effective clotrimazole (cream 1%) for the topical treatment of mycotic vaginitis. Five grams of cream were applied to the vagina for 7 consecutive days. Twenty non-pregnant and 19 pregnant patients were included in each group. Clinical and mycological controls were carried out one week and one month after completion of therapy and 89.7% of the patients treated with terconazole responded to therapy and 82.1% patients treated with clotrimazole were cured. Statistical analysis showed no significant difference when the results of the terconazole treated patients and the clotrimazole group were compared.

Three hundred and thirty Black pregnant patients attending the Baragwanath Hospital antenatal clinic were treated for symptomatic vaginal discharge with econazole (Ecostatin; Squibb). Patients with positive Candida albicans cultures were treated for either 7 or 14 days. The results of treatment in both groups are presented.

To examine the efficacy of cholinergic enhancement in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (SDAT), oral physostigmine was given to eight patients in a cross-over trial of three dose levels and a matching placebo. A dose-related improvement in memory as measured by objective verbal memory tests was observed. Performance was significantly better on the highest dose, 2 mg every 2 h, than on the lower doses. The effect was most systematically present for very short-term memory, which raises the question of whether the improvement may involve attention rather than longer term storage and retrieval.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the effectiveness of case management for community elderly with hypertension (HT), diabetes mellitus, and hypercholesterolemia (HC) (the so-called three highs).
DESIGN AND SETTING: Secondary data of the first and 3-month-after visiting records were extracted from 33 Public Health Centers in Taiwan.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven hundred and sixty-six clients were selected who were at least 65 years old and had been diagnosed twice on the Case Management Record with at least one of the three highs.
RESULTS: This sample had a mean age of 72.6 years, 59.7% were female. Approximately 74% of the clients had HT, 55% had diabetes, and 15% had HC. Each elderly revealed 1.4 highs of the three highs. The elderly with HT, and diabetes, their blood pressures (BP) and blood sugars significantly decreased after being managed by public health nurses. Males and the elderly living in urban areas had more decrease in systolic BP. Females had more decrease in fasting blood sugar.
CONCLUSIONS: The study found that the case management of the three highs presented effectiveness on reducing the values of the three highs of the elderly in community.

Breathlessness, exercise tolerance, and spirometry were measured in 12 patients whose major symptom was breathlessness, secondary to severe chronic airflow limitation, during a double-blind crossover comparison of inhaled salbutamol in two dosages (200 micrograms 4-hourly and 200 micrograms 2-hourly) with placebo. Daily visual analogue scores of breathlessness, exercise tolerance and spirometry were all significantly improved with salbutamol in both dosages compared to placebo. The 2-hourly regimen was superior to the 4-hourly regimen only in terms of exercise tolerance. Walking distance had deteriorated significantly 2 hours after salbutamol on the 4-hourly regimen and was usefully increased by an extra dose of salbutamol on the 2-hourly regimen at the equivalent time, without side-effects. Salbutamol provided considerable symptomatic relief in addition to spirometric improvement in patients with chronic airflow limitation.

While most genitourinary (GU) medicine clinics achieve a high uptake for testing HIV in new patients, they may still miss testing those at highest risk. Point-of-care testing (POCT) and salivary samples are acceptable and feasible but have not yet been shown to increase uptake among high-risk patients (HRP). This study aimed to describe reasons why HRP decline HIV testing and whether offering POCT along with standard testing would increase the uptake of testing HIV in two London GU medicine clinics. Anonymous self-administered questionnaires were offered to all new and rebooked patients. Eight hundred and ninety-nine questionnaires were analysed of which 598 were HRP. Uptake of HIV testing was 77.1% among HRP and 65.8% among the rest. A total of 51.1% of HRP who declined HIV testing said they would be more likely to accept a POCT and 32.8% a salivary test. Introduction of rapid POCT for HIV would increase patient's choice and may increase the likelihood of HRP accepting an HIV test.

Sixty patients with probable atypical depression--defined as meeting Research Diagnostic Criteria for depressive illness, having reactive mood, and having one of four associated symptoms (hyperphagia, hypersomnolence, leaden feeling, and sensitivity to rejection)--took part in a study contrasting phenelzine, imipramine, and placebo. Phenelzine was found to be superior to imipramine and placebo. These results were compared to results from a sample of 120 patients with identical characteristics, except that they had more than one associated atypical symptom (full atypical syndrome). The size of the drug effect was comparable in patients with full atypical and partial atypical syndromes.

Use of insecticide-treated bednets (ITNs) to prevent malaria remains low, and effective distribution strategies are needed. An integrated child health campaign with free distribution of 162,254 untreated bednets bundled with insecticide, measles vaccination, vitamin A, and mebendazole for children < 5 years old ("under-5s") was conducted in Lindi Region, Tanzania. We conducted a representative household survey 3 months after the campaign. Altogether, 574 households with 354 under-5s were visited. In households with an under-5, possession of bednets and ITNs increased from 60.9% to 90.7% (P < 0.001) and from 16.5% to 37.3% (P < 0.001), respectively. Increases occurred in all wealth quintiles and equity improved. Reported bednet and ITN use the previous night among under-5s was 46.3% and 21.5%, respectively. Integrated campaigns rapidly and equitably increase bednet possession and use meriting continued large-scale implementation. However, our study found that bednets were rarely treated; thus, future campaigns should provide factory-treated long-lasting ITNs. Low ITN use underscores the need for further efforts to increase use after campaigns.

This study evaluated differences in pharmaceutical care (PC) between hospitalized HIV-infection patients and Infectious Disease (ID) consult patients without HIV infection. Twelve HIV-infected in-patients and 19 ID consult in-patients treated at a veterans Affair Medical Centre were monitored by an ID/HIV pharmacotherapy post-doctoral resident under the supervision of an ID-trained faculty member. Pharmacotherapy intervention were categorized by type, clinical significance and expected patient outcome. Of 218 interventions, 139 (64%) were for HIV-infected patients compared to 79 (36%) for ID consult patients. Significantly more interventions in the HIV-infected group were expected to enhance the therapeutic effect of a drug regimen (p < 0.05). A pharmacist with an expertise in ID/HIV pharmacotherapy may enhance therapeutic outcomes of HIV-infected-in-patients.
This research examined the effectiveness of different HIV prevention videos for students as a function of whether they were in a dating relationship. Two hundred two college students completed pretest measures and were randomly assigned to watch one of three 42-min videos (communication skills, technical skills, combined skills). Posttest and 3-month follow-up data indicated that receiving the technical skills video was associated with greater self-efficacy for condom use across several different dimensions. However, students who received the combined skills video and were not currently in a dating relationship had the greatest proportion of protected acts of intercourse. These findings suggest that video-based interventions can be an effective way of decreasing risky sexual behavior, and that HIV prevention messages that focus on both technical and communication skills are the most successful in leading to behavioral change.

Despite their wishes, terminal cancer patients are frequently readmitted to hospitals. This appears in part to be due to poor communication amongst professional caregivers and/or the overburdening of their (informal) caregivers. This quasi-experimental study investigated the effects of a transmural home care programme on re-hospitalization, quality of life and place of death for terminal cancer patients. The programme intended to optimize communication, cooperation and coordination between intra- and extra-mural health care organizations (transmural care). Initial patient characteristics of the intervention group (n = 79) matched those of the control group (n = 37) well. When compared to the control group, which received the standard community care, patients in the intervention group underwent significantly less re-hospitalization during the terminal phase of their illness (5.8 versus 11.5 days; P < 0.01) while the intervention contributed significantly positive to the patients' "physical" quality of life 1 month after the start of the intervention. A higher, but not significant (P = 0.06) percentage of patients in the intervention group also died at home (81 versus 65%). The introduction of measures to enhance coordination and cooperation of intra- and extramural care, seems to be an improvement compared to standard community care.

Two hundred admissions to a general surgical ward were audited prospectively before and after the introduction of a thromboembolic risk score. This was based on the Thromboembolic Risk Factors (THRIFT) Consensus Group guidelines for thrombo-prophylaxis. The results showed an overall improvement in compliance from 65% to 79%. High risk patients formed 24% of the patients studied. In this group, compliance improved significantly from 14% to 58%. The overall prevalence of important thromboembolic risk factors was calculated. Of the patients, 26.5% had a Body Mass Index (BMI) of > 25, and 10% gave a past or family history of thromboembolism. Of female patients, 24% were taking oestrogens. We conclude that quantitative assessment of all patients for thromboembolic risk can improve the implementation of thromboprophylaxis, particularly in high risk patients.
In this open label pilot safety study 80 children over 3 months old with deep venous thrombosis were treated with enoxaparin with a target 4 h anti-factor Xa activity between 0.5-0.8 IU/mL. The children were stratified to receive once daily or twice daily doses. The study end-points were post-thrombotic syndrome, re-thrombosis, bleeding, and therapy-related death. The median duration of treatment was 5 months and the median follow-up was 24 months. No significant differences were found between the two groups of patients. No bleeding or therapy-related deaths occurred. These safety and efficacy data may serve as a basis to initiate an international multicenter study on enoxaparin treatment.
Administration of low molecular weight heparin following heart surgery in paediatric patients in order to prevent thromboembolic events results in a large variation in anti-Xa activities. A population study was undertaken to determine pharmacokinetic parameters after nadroparin calcium (Fraxiparine) administration and the effects of potential covariates; this study included 154 children divided into two groups: a model group (124 patients) and a validation group (30 patients). The 432 anti-Xa activities were analysed using NONMEM on the basis of a one-compartment model with three parameters: apparent clearance, apparent volume of distribution and absorption rate. The influence of body weight, age, sex and dose regimen (once or twice daily) were investigated. The best fit corresponds to the formula: apparent clearance (l/min)=0. 541 x weight1.51/(6.151.51 + weight1.51) and apparent volume (l)=0.355 x weight. The inter-individual variability (expressed in coefficient of variation) of these parameters are high, especially with regard to the apparent volume (92%), but no other available covariate was found to explain this variability.
A randomised double-blind controlled trial compared three-day and 10-day courses of amoxycillin (25 mg/kg daily) in children with otitis media. Seventeen doctors from five centres admitted 84 children between the ages of 2 and 10 years. Symptoms and signs were measured on admission to the trial, on day 3, and on day 15. Mother's observations were recorded daily for 10 days. Audiograms were performed at four and 12 weeks after the end of the trial. The treatment groups showed little difference in the speed of resolution of symptoms and signs, the numbers of primary treatment failures, or the frequency of recurrent ear infections. There were no complications in either group. Most children with otitis media can probably be successfully and safely treated with no more than a three-day course of amoxycillin providing their progress is reviewed about the fifth or sixth day after treatment started. This policy could save over 1 million pounds annually in antibiotic costs.
We tested the impact of stress management training on sexual behavior and immune functioning in 64 gay men infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Subjects randomized to the stress management group met for eight two-hour sessions and one all day retreat to learn systematic relaxation, health behavior change, and stress management skills. Compared to those randomized to a wait list control, treatment subjects reported significantly fewer sexual partners in the prior month at post-test (1.10 vs 2.29 for controls). There were no differences between groups in lymphocyte numbers and function.
Tibial stress fractures commonly occur in athletes and military recruits. This prospective, randomized, double-blind clinical study sought to determine whether pulsed ultrasound reduces tibial stress fracture healing time. Twenty-six midshipmen (43 tibial stress fractures) were randomized to pulsed ultrasound or placebo treatment. Twenty-minute daily treatments continued until patients were asymptomatic with signs of healing on plain radiographs. The groups were not significantly different in demographics, delay from symptom onset to diagnosis, missed treatment days, total number of treatments, or time to return to duty. Pulsed ultrasound did not significantly reduce the healing time for tibial stress fractures.
Although one-third of clients enrolled in methadone treatment in the United States are female, few studies have looked at gender differences at admission and follow-up. Using interview data from 435 clients (31% female) collected at admission and approximately 1 year after discharge, females were found to have more dysfunctional families of origin and greater prior and current psychological and medical problems. Both genders improved following treatment, as evidenced by reduced illicit drug, tobacco, and alcohol use, criminal involvement, and HIV/AIDS-risky behaviors. Females were more likely to seek further help for both drug misuse and psychological problems subsequent to discharge.
Previous work has shown length of time in drug abuse treatment is associated with better outcomes, but the role of therapeutic engagement and process needs further examination. In this study, the total number of counseling sessions attended by 557 clients in their first 90 days of community-based outpatient treatment was examined in relation to indicators of treatment delivery and progress. Significant client improvements were found on behavioral criteria and psychosocial functioning during the first 3 months of treatment, and session attendance was positively related to favorable behavioral changes as well as to positive perceptions by clients and counselors of their therapeutic interactions. Client background, treatment motivation, and therapeutic focus of counseling in Month 1 were significant predictors of session attendance in the first 3 months following admission to methadone treatment.
The aim of DILEMMA is to provide tools for the development of decision support systems for use in general medical practice, hospital-based cancer care, and shared care of cancer and cardiology patients. In primary care, the project intends to provide aids to clinical performance in prescribing, referral and the use of clinical guidelines. The demonstrator applications involve telematics and knowledge-based methodology, using an approach termed logic engineering which combines logic programming and software lifecycle methods. DILEMMA will demonstrate systems to assist shared care and home care which should help reduce pressure on secondary health resources and, by disseminating best practice knowledge, improve patient care and patient quality of life.

A population of 127 alcoholics of both sexes, hospitalized and weaned (DSM III diagnose: Alcohol Abuse and Alcohol Dependence) received Acamprosate (n = 63) or placebo (n = 64) in a double blind randomized therapeutic trail. The patients were followed during three months and anamnestic as well as biological data were recorded. It appeared no significant differences between the two groups of patients. This negative result could perhaps be explained by the heaviness of the pathology of this hospitalized alcoholic population.
103 patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), disqualified for thrombolytic treatment, were randomized into two groups. Group I received 5000 IU of heparin (subcutaneously, twice daily) for 14 to 21 days. Group II was without anticoagulant prophylaxis. Patients were evaluated for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) using radiofibrinogen uptake test and for the presence of intracardiac mural thrombus (ICT) by two-dimensional echocardiography (50 patients). The incidence of DVT was 4% in group I and 19% in group II. ICT was diagnosed in three patients (13%) of group I and in 10 patients (45%) of group II. Five patients under heparin prophylaxis and 6 non-anticoagulant patients died in the hospital of cardiac causes. There were no bleeding complications. Low-dose heparin seems to be an effective prophylaxis of thrombotic complications in patients with AMI.
The effectiveness of low-dose subcutaneous heparin in the prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis in patients with ischemic stroke was investigated in an unblinded controlled study. The frequency of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in the control group was 23% versus 2% in the patients receiving heparin. There were no bleeding complications in the test group and there were no differences in the occurrence of hemorrhage changes in the cerebral ischemic infarction in both groups.
Patients with acute myocardial infarction of less than 48 hours duration were randomized into three groups. The "fully anticoagulated" group received heparin by intravenous infusion and warfarin sodium to maintain a whole blood clotting time of 30 to 90 minutes and a prothrombin index of 10% to 35%. The "low dose" heparin group received 500 units by intravenous infusion every 12 hours. The control group received no anticoagulants. The radioactive fibrinogen test was used to diagnose the presence of leg vein thromboses. The control group had an incidence of venous thrombosis of 29.7% compared with 13.9% in the low dose group and 11.3% in the fully anticoagulated group. Patients in the control group who had cardiac failure had a significantly higher incidence of venous thromboses (71.4%) when compared with patients not in failure (20.0%). In the two treatment groups no significant difference was observed in patients with and without cardiac failure. Patients with cardiac failure complicating an acute myocardial infarction have a high incidence of venous thromboses. Anticoagulants significantly reduce this incidence and low dose intravenous heparin is as efficacious as full anticoagulation.
A trial of subcutaneous low-dose heparin in the prevention of deep-vein thrombosis was carried out in elderly patients admitted to hospital after an acute stroke. A statistically significant reduction was observed in deep-vein thrombosis as assessed by isotope leg scanning.
A trial of low-dose subcutaneous heparin to prevent thromboembolic complications after myocardial infarction was carried out in 78 patients. Of the 37 heparin-treated patients only two (5%) developed evidence of leg vein thrombosis, while 14 (34%) of the 41 controls did so, and five controls developed pulmonary emboli. Leg vein thrombosis developed in 12 (50%) of the 24 controls who did not smoke cigarettes but in only two (13%) of the 17 controls who were cigarette smokers. Non-smokers who have a myocardial infarction should be given low-dose heparin subcutaneously to prevent leg vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
A trial of continuous intravenous heparin in the prevention of deep vein thrombosis was undertaken in 48 patients who had suffered a myocardial infarction. Of the 24 control patients who did not receive heparin seven (29%) developed calf vein thrombosis as detected by the radioactive fibrinogen technique. None of the 24 heparinized patients had any evidence of venous thrombosis. This difference is significant at the 1% level.

Suprofen 200 mg and suprofen 400 mg were found to be as efficacious as diflunisal 750 mg in a single-dose, double-blind randomized study of 130 hospitalized patients with pain following meniscectomy. Pain intensity was measured using both an interval scale and a visual analogue scale. Pain indices derived from both scales as well as the physician's global evaluation were consistent in demonstrating that suprofen is an effective analgesic agent in the relief of moderate to severe pain following orthopedic surgery.
Although intravenous indomethacin and ibuprofen are widely used for closure of patent ductus arteriosus in premature infants, these formulations are unavailable in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In this study of the therapeutic effects of oral treatments, 20 preterm infants were randomized to oral ibuprofen (1 x 10 mg/kg, then 2 x 5 mg/kg at 24-hour intervals) or oral indomethacin (3 x 0.2 mg/kg at 24-hour intervals). Complete ductal closure was seen in 7/10 of the indomethacin and 8/10 of the ibuprofen group. The difference was not significant. There was no reopening after the ductal closure during the hospital stay or in the follow-up visits in either group and no excessive increases in the blood urea nitrogen or serum creatinine levels were observed.
The effects of administration of low-molecular-weight heparin (enoxaparin 20 mg) once a day, of unfractionated heparin (5000 IU twice a day, and of unfractionated heparin (2500 IU) plus dihydroergotamine (0.5 mg) twice a day were assessed in 100 patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy. The test medications were given subcutaneously 2 hours before operation and for 3 days thereafter. There were no thromboembolic complications. Intraoperative blood loss, wound haematomas and blood loss via drains during four days after operation were similar in the three groups. None of the 37 patients receiving enoxaparin experienced major postoperative bleeding. Six out of 31 patients receiving unfractionated heparin without dihydroergotamine and two out of 32 patients receiving dihydroergotamine in addition experienced major bleeding necessitating re-operation and/or blood transfusion, (P < 0.05). Enoxaparin caused less major bleeding than unfractionated heparin with or without dihydroergotamine in patients undergoing hysterectomy.
One hundred seven patients undergoing major surgery for gynecologic malignancy participated in a controlled trial evaluating the effectiveness of pneumatic calf compression in the prevention of postoperative deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. External pneumatic calf compression was applied intraoperatively and for five postoperative days. All patients were prospectively screened for deep venous thrombosis with impedance plethysmography and 125I-fibrinogen leg counting. Deep venous thrombosis and/or pulmonary emboli were detected in 18 of 52 control group patients (34.6%) whereas in seven of 55 (12.7%) of those treated with external pneumatic calf compression (P less than .005). External pneumatic calf compression was most effective during the first five days postoperatively and also reduced the incidence of deep venous thrombosis in patients at highest risk. When applied during surgery and for five days postoperatively, external pneumatic calf compression significantly reduces the incidence of postoperative venous thrombosis.
In a controlled, randomized study, survival of patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung (SCCL) was prolonged on addition of warfarin sodium to combination chemotherapy plus radiation therapy. Median survival for 25 control patients was 24 weeks and for 25 warfarin-treated patients was 50 weeks. This difference could not be accounted for by differences between groups in performance status, extent of disease, age, or sex. The survival advantage associated with warfarin administration was observed both for patients with extensive disease and for those who failed to achieve complete or partial remission. The warfarin-treated group also demonstrated a significantly increased time to first evidence of disease progression. These results suggest that warfarin may be useful in the treatment of SCCL and also support the hypothesis that the blood coagulation mechanism may be involved in the growth and spread of cancer in man.
Twenty-two female psychiatric outpatients with experiences of childhood sexual abuse took part in a two-year group therapy. All completed therapy. At the end of therapy the women's psychiatric symptoms were reduced and their social interaction and adjustment were improved. They evaluated relationships to their children, partners and friends to be improved.
Change during a 20-week group therapy program was researched for 40 women who were survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Results indicated that the women who participated in group therapy, compared with a quasi-experimental control group, decreased significantly on measures of depression, social maladjustment, self-blame, and posttraumatic stress responses, with no significant increases in anger. Scores on the main variables remained stable during assessment and follow-up periods for the women who participated in group therapy. In addition, there were no significantly different patterns of change based on either sexual abuse variables (number of perpetrators, sexual abuse by a father figure, nature of sexual abuse, and duration) or participation in concurrent individual therapy.
OBJECTIVE: The role of group therapy in treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been traditionally restricted to issues of self-esteem and interpersonal relationships, rather than primary symptoms of the disorder. In this study, the authors examined the effectiveness of a 16-week trauma-focused, cognitive-behavioral group therapy, named Interactive Psychoeducational Group Therapy, in reducing primary symptoms of PTSD in five groups (N=29) of multiply traumatized women diagnosed with chronic PTSD. METHOD: The authors made assessments at baseline, at 1-month intervals during treatment, at termination, and at 6-month follow-up by using self-report and structured interview measures of PTSD and psychiatric symptoms. The absence of a control group limits the conclusions drawn from the study. RESULTS: At termination, subjects showed significant reductions in all three clusters of PTSD symptoms (i.e., reexperiencing, avoidance, and hyperarousal) and in depressive symptoms; they showed near-significant reductions in general psychiatric and dissociative symptoms, at termination. These improvements were sustained at 6-month follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: The role of group therapy in PTSD treatment should not be prematurely restricted to addressing self-esteem and interpersonal dimensions only. The use of structured, cognitive-behavioral elements within the group format may allow for more targeted treatment of core symptoms of the disorder.
Adult female sexual abuse survivors (N = 148) participated in year-long therapy groups. Demographic, abuse history, initial symptomatology, and group process variables were examined in relationship to group completion and improvement over time. Survivors who had previously been psychiatrically hospitalized were less likely to complete group treatment. Among group completers, significant pretreatment-posttreatment changes were found on measures of locus of control, sexual problems, self-esteem, trauma-related symptomatology (TSC-33), and general psychological distress (SCL-90-R). Greater changes on the SCL-90-R were found among Caucasian women, women with more initial trauma-related symptomatology, women whose abuse included intercourse, members of groups with similar abuse histories, and women with previous psychotherapy experience.
The risk of venous thromboembolism associated with long-haul flights is the subject of controversy. In a prospective, controlled study, we examined 160 passengers before and after return from a long-haul flight and 160 age-matched and sex-matched, non-travelling volunteers using venous compression ultrasound. Deep vein thrombosis was not observed in either group. Isolated calf muscle vein thrombosis (ICMVT) was present in 4/160 (2.5%) flight passengers and in 1/160 (0.6%) controls. All subjects with ICMVT were clinically asymptomatic, and ICMVT was located in the soleal muscle veins in all four subjects. Three of the four passengers with ICMVT had other risk factors for thrombosis.
OBJECTIVES: to identify the incidence of prolonged travel among consecutive patients with deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and to investigate any differences in the patterns of traveller's thrombosis versus DVT's with no history of prolonged recent travel. METHODS: of 137 consecutive patients, who were confirmed to have DVT by duplex ultrasonography, 36 were excluded because of either prolonged immobilisation or recent surgery. All patients were asked whether they had travelled within 2 weeks for more than 3h. The presence of other classic risk factors for DVT was also recorded. Patients who were unlikely to travel as a result of prolonged immobility for more than 2 weeks and those who underwent surgery within 2 weeks were excluded from the study. The extent and location of thrombi was also verified by duplex scanning in each patient. RESULTS: of 101 patients, eligible for the final analysis, 15 (15%) claimed to have a recent travel, of whom 9 (9%) travelled by air. By comparison of a group of 106 patients with similar symptoms at presentation, but who had negative duplex finding 12 (11%) had a history of prolonged travel (p=0.8, Fisher's exact test). Travel-related DVT occurred to a significantly younger age group than non travellers. Thirteen (87%) out of 15 patients with travel-related DVT had another coexisting risk factor and 7 out of 10 patients had a positive thrombophilia screen. CONCLUSION: The majority of those with travel-related DVT had other concomitant risk factors and a high incidence of a positive thrombophilia screen, suggesting that travel itself may act as an additive risk among those with pre-existing risk factors for DVT.
To address the association between travel and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) we examined the risk factors for DVT in 568 consecutive patients with suspected DVT attending King's College Hospital in London. No significant link between DVT and long-haul travel was demonstrable in this cohort, with an odds ratio of 1.3 (CI 0.6-2.8). Risk of DVT was only increased in long-haul travellers if one or more additional risk factors were present, with an odds ratio of 3.0 (CI 1.1-8.2). Such individuals may benefit from prophylactic measures to minimize risk.
The LONFLIT study was planned to evaluate the incidence of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) occurring as a consequence of long flights. In the Lonflit study 355 subjects at low-risk for DVT and 389 at high-risk were studied. Low-risk subjects had no cardiovascular disease and used no drugs. All flights were in economy class. The average flight duration was 12.4 hours (range, 10-15 hr). The mean age of the studied subjects was 46 years (range 20-80 yr, SD 11; 56% males). DVT diagnosis was made by ultrasound scans after the flights (within 24 hours). In low-risk subjects no events were recorded while in high-risk subjects 11 had DVT (2.8%) with 13 thromboses in 11 subjects and 6 superficial thromboses (total of 19 thrombotic events in 389 patients [4.9%]). In the Lonflit2 study the authors studied 833 subjects (randomized into 422 control subjects and 411 using below-knee stockings). Mean age was 44.8 years (range, 20-80 yr, SD 12; 57% males). The average flight duration was 12.4 hours. Scans were made before and after the flights. In the control group there were 4.5% of subjects with DVT while only 0.24% of subjects had DVT in the stockings group. The difference was significant. The incidence of DVT observed when subjects were wearing stockings was 18.75 times lower than in controls. Long-haul flights are associated to DVT in some 4-5% of high-risk subjects. Below-knee stockings are beneficial in reducing the incidence of DVT.
BACKGROUND: Little information is available concerning risk factors for venous thromboembolism (VTE) in nonhospitalized patients. PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: An epidemiologic case-control study of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) risk factors was conducted in 1272 outpatients by general practitioners. The case population (636 patients presenting with DVT) was paired with the control population (636 patients presenting with influenzal or rhinopharyngeal syndrome) according to sex and age. Deep vein thrombosis was to be documented by at least 1 objective test. Risk factors were classified into "intrinsic" ("permanent") and "triggering" ("transient") factors and were evidenced using univariate analysis. RESULTS: In the medical population, defined as patients who had not undergone surgery or application of a plaster cast to the lower extremities within the 3 weeks preceding inclusion (494 cases and 494 controls), intrinsic factors such as history of VTE, venous insufficiency, chronic heart failure, obesity, immobile standing position, history of more than 3 pregnancies, and triggering factors such as pregnancy, violent effort, or muscular trauma, deterioration of general condition, immobilization, long-distance travel, and infectious disease were significantly more frequent in the case patients than in the controls (odds ratio, >1; P<.05). In the overall population, additional risk factors were cancer, blood group A, plaster cast of the lower extremities, and surgery. In both populations, the number of risk factors per patient was greater in the case patients than in the controls. CONCLUSION: Several risk factors for DVT were identified in medical outpatients presenting with DVT, and their comprehension may improve appropriateness and efficiency of the different methods available for thromboprophylaxis. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:3415-3420.
The thromboembolic syndrome due to prolonged sitting was described after varied circumstances, particularly among the passengers after a long duration flight. The Aeroports De Paris medical department had collected 70 cases of pulmonary embolism between 1984 and 1998. Their incidence increases during the last years, corresponding to the growth of air traffic and mainly to the increase of long duration without stop flight (76.5% of our cases correspond to more than 12 hours flight). According to the number of the passengers landing in the Aeroports de Paris, the incidence during 1998 is 0.5 per million of passengers, with an important female prevalence and 31% of cases with thrombo-embolic antecedents. 61% of reported cases fainted just after landing. Our experience is limited as it considers only the acute cases, the late accidents do not come in our emergency service.
BACKGROUND: The link between travel and the risk of venous thromboembolic disease (VTED) has been widely suspected. However, only cases or series of cases have been reported in the literature. STUDY OBJECTIVES: By means of a case-control study, we sought to confirm this relationship and to determine the main features, if any, of these posttravel VTEDs. DESIGN: The history, in particular the history of recent travel, of 160 patients presenting in our department with VTED was scrupulously investigated. All journeys undertaken during the preceding 4 weeks and lasting > 4 h by whatever means of transport were considered. The same questionnaire was submitted to a control group. RESULTS: When the two groups of patients are compared, a history of recent travel is found almost four times more frequently in the VTED group (p < 0.0001). The odds ratio for having a VTED in patients who traveled was 3.98 (95% confidence interval, 1.9 to 8.4). Means of travel used included the train in 2 cases, airplane in 9, and car in 28. Mean duration of travel was 5.4+/-2.1 h. These posttravel VTEDs are not confined to a specific location, seem to involve no particular predisposition, and are more often "idiopathic." This fact supports the hypothesis that travel alone can produce vein clot formation. CONCLUSIONS: A history of recent travel is a risk factor for VTED. Posttravel venous thrombotic events can occur after short journeys in patients with no other risk factors or concomitant disease
The relative efficacy of sodium and calcium heparin in preventing venous thromboembolism and their relative side-effects were studied in 234 high-risk patients in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. The two heparin preparations were from the same batch and in the same concentration, and were given in a dose of 5000 U 12 hourly. Positive leg scans were found in 19% after placebo, 12% after sodium heparin and 8% after calcium heparin. Bruising at the injection site was more common after calcium heparin (66%) than after sodium heparin (53%) or placebo (38%). Pain at the injection site was also more common after calcium heparin (26%) than after sodium heparin (8%) or placebo (6%). Changes in the activated partial thromboplastin time were small and did not correlate with leg scan results or bruising. While there was a tendency for calcium heparin to be possibly more effective, it was followed by significantly more local haematoma and pain.
The incidence of deep venous thrombosis of the legs (DVT) was studied in 119 critically ill patients by 125I-labeled fibrinogen scanning; the efficacy of low-dose heparin prophylaxis was assessed in a randomized, double-blind study. DVT occurred in 29% of control patients and in 13% of patients receiving heparin 5000 U subcutaneously twice daily. DVT was found mainly in men and was associated with circulatory impairment, respiratory failure and recent vascular or cancer surgery. In a comparison study of medical patients, DVT occurred in 10% untreated and 2% treated. In conclusion, the critically ill are at high risk of venous thromboembolism and low-dose prophylaxis is warranted in those who have no hemostatic impairment.
Acute massive pulmonary thromboembolism is a life threatening disorder that must be treated immediately. We performed emergent pulmonary thrombectomy using cardiopulmonary bypass on 15 patients. The patients were 7 men and 8 women aged 28 to 81 years. Early diagnosis was made by body CT scan and echocardiography. When patient had massive pulmonary thromboembolism, when hemodynamics could not be improved by medical treatment, direct embolectomy was performed immediately. 12 patients developed shock and 8 patients underwent cardiac massage. Among 15 patients, 11 were saved by surgical treatment, while the remaining 4 died of multiple organ failure, cardiac failure and mediastinitis. The lives of patients with acute massive pulmonary thromboembolism can be saved by early detection and emergent thrombectomy using cardiopulmonary bypass.
BACKGROUND: Acute pulmonary embolism confers a high mortality rate despite advances in diagnosis and therapy. Thrombolysis is often effective but has a high frequency of major bleeding complications, especially intracranial hemorrhage. Therefore, we liberalized our criteria for acute pulmonary embolectomy and considered operating on patients with anatomically extensive pulmonary embolism and concomitant moderate to severe right ventricular dysfunction despite preserved systemic arterial pressure. METHODS AND RESULTS: We report 29 (17 men and 12 women) consecutive patients who underwent embolectomy from October 1999 through October 2001. Twenty-six patients (89%) survived surgery and were alive more than 1 month postoperatively. Median follow-up is 10 months. CONCLUSION: The high survival rate of 89% can be attributed to improved surgical technique, rapid diagnosis and triage, and careful patient selection. We hope that other tertiary centers will evaluate pulmonary embolism patients with an algorithm that includes surgical embolectomy as one of several therapeutic options. Our contemporary approach to pulmonary embolectomy no longer confines this operation to a treatment of last resort reserved for clinically desperate circumstances.
We compared embolectomy (when available) with thrombolysis in patients with shock and massive pulmonary embolism. 13 patients were operated on, 10 (77%) of whom survived. The inferior vena cava was routinely clipped. The 24 medically treated patients were given alteplase until systemic and pulmonary artery pressures stabilised and heparin thereafter; 16 (67%) survived. Major haemorrhage occurred in 28% of medically treated patients, but was not fatal. 1 patient had a small cerebral haemorrhage that resolved without drainage. One-fifth of the medical group had a re-embolism, which suggests that temporary caval umbrellas are indicated in medically treated patients. Thrombolysis may provide a life-saving option and a randomised trial is warranted.
Pulmonary embolectomy in the treatment of acute massive pulmonary embolism (PE) is the subject of considerable controversy with regard to indication, technique of embolectomy and perioperative management. Since 1968 50 patients have undergone surgery for massive PE in our unit. Inflow occlusion technique and cardiopulmonary bypass were used in 33 and 17 patients, respectively. The overall operative mortality was 46%. Univariate analysis disclosed age (< 60 vs > 60), preoperative hemodynamics (cardiogenic shock vs cardiac arrest), location of emboli (peripheral vs central), duration of symptoms (hours vs days vs weeks) and number of episodes (first episode vs recurrent pulmonary emboli) as predictive factors of the post-operative outcome. The results of the retrospective analysis show that pulmonary embolectomy remains an acceptable procedure in patients with acute massive pulmonary emboli who are in refractory cardiogenic shock or who need intermittent resuscitation.
Between 1983 und 1991, emergency pulmonary embolectomy with the aid of extracorporeal circulation was performed in 13 patients. Ten patients were in class IV according to Greenfield, seven came into the operating theater with external cardiac massage. The 30-day mortality was 46%. In the same period, 15 venous interruption procedures were performed (three Adams de Weese Clip, ten Greenfield-Filter, and two femoral vein ligations). Eight times the venous interruption procedure was done prophylactically. The acute pulmonary embolism of class III and IV according to Greenfield is an indication for lytic therapy. We operate only if there is a contraindication to lytic therapy or if there is deterioration of the clinical state.
Pulmonary embolectomies were performed in 30 patients from January 1973 until December 1991 in the University Hospital of Leuven. There was an 80% hospital survival. The late follow-up showed no recurrent pulmonary emboli. The preoperative haemodynamic status was the most important predictor for survival. Patients, under cardiopulmonary resuscitation or in profound cardiogenic shock before surgery, had a survival of only 50% while all other patients survived. Angiography, performed in only 23% of the cases, remained the most important diagnostic tool until the advent of transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography. Thrombolysis is an acceptable alternative in the stable patient, but pulmonary embolectomy is life-saving in the haemodynamically unstable patient and when thrombolysis is contraindicated.
Pulmonary embolectomy under total cardiopulmonary bypass was carried out in 16 patients with cardiogenic collapsus and hypotension not responding to vasopressors or cardiac arrest. Eleven patients (68.75%) survived and were followed up for years. Our observations are presented with special emphasis on the early and accurate diagnosis, the exact timing of the therapeutic methods, the use of the portable cardiopulmonary bypass-even in the ward, and the possibilities of decreasing the operative mortality rate in less than 30% (from 40% to 22% in our series). Despite the fact that in many countries, especially European, pulmonary artery embolectomy is no more carried out as a primary therapy for massive or submassive embolism since thrombolysis is today considered as the best therapy with a low mortality rate of 8-11%, we still believe that there is a number of patients who could benefit only from surgical intervention. Based on our own experience and that presented in the international literature, an attempt was made to discuss the existing problems, mainly diagnosis and treatment of this formidable condition, reevaluating pulmonary embolectomy.
Between 1964 and 1986 a total of 71 pulmonary embolectomies were performed for acute massive pulmonary embolism. All patients were severely compromised haemodynamically. Sixteen (64%) of 25 patients who had sustained significant periods of cardiac arrest before operation died. The principal cause of death in this group was severe neurological damage. Five (11%) of the 46 who had not had a cardiac arrest died. The 50 (70%) patients who survived did so largely without morbidity during their hospital admission and in the follow up period. Most were not treated with long term anticoagulants and only two had another embolism. When a patient with acute massive pulmonary embolism is too ill to be given thrombolytic treatment, or when thrombolysis is either contraindicated or too slow in producing benefit, pulmonary embolectomy remains an effective alternative treatment with an acceptable mortality.
Between 1969 and 1984, twenty-three patients underwent an emergency pulmonary embolectomy under extracorporeal circulation in the Catholic University of Louvain (UCL), Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery. The aim of this paper is to delineate the indications of this procedure. Patients were 23 to 70 years old. Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism was made according to clinical signs, ECG and Chest X Ray with Swan-Ganz catheter insertion into the pulmonary artery and the help of pulmonary angiogram if time permitted. The surgical technique is briefly described. Four patients died during the immediate postoperative period and three died later. The sixteen survivors all enjoy a normal life.
Embolectomy was performed by the Trendelenburg method on one patient and with cardiopulmonary bypass on 10 patients during the period 1961 to 1975. The use of cardiopulmonary bypass permitted preoperative resuscitation, cardiorespiratory support during the operation, complete embolectomies to be performed and resulted in the survival of 4 of the 10 patients. There were 5 patients who suffered cardiac arrest prior to embolectomy. Three died intraoperatively, of which two died of left ventricular failure, and two others died postoperatively of brain damage indicating the need to proceed rapidly with the accurate diagnosis and treatment of massive pulmonary embolism. Following embolectomy, partial interruption of the inferior vena cava was performed and prevented recurrent pulmonary emboli and significant post-thrombotic sequelae in four patients. Another patient underwent caval ligation with significant sequelae.
Five patients with severe chronic lung disease were given placebo or 7.5 mg of clorazepate, a benzodiazepine, at bedtime for two weeks using a double-blind cross-over study design. Exercise tolerance, arterial blood gases, pulmonary function tests, self-rated breathlessness, and self-administered depression and anxiety scores were similar during drug treatment, placebo treatment, and washout periods. Higher doses of clorazepate were not tolerated by three of five patients. Nonanxious patients with chronic lung disease seem not to benefit subjectively or objectively from a low-dose benzodiazepine regimen.
Intravenous injection of the murine monoclonal anti-CA125 antibody B43.13 (Ovarex: Ab1) into ovarian cancer patients led to the induction of an idiotypic network. Of the 75 patients who received one to ten injections of a 2-mg dose of the antibody, 48 developed anti-(mAb B43.13) antibodies (Ab2); 18 of these patients also had elevated levels of anti-[anti-(mAb B43.13)] antibodies (Ab3; = anti-CA125 antibodies) compared to pre-injection values. Characterization of these antibodies revealed that the binding to CA125 could be inhibited by mAb B43.13 in most samples. Human anti-CA125 antibodies or Ab3 purified from patient serum samples specifically recognized human ovarian tumor cells and tissues expressing CA125. In addition, these anti-CA125 antibodies were able to conduct Fc-mediated tumor cell killing (antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity). This raises the possibility of using an Ab1 for anti-idiotype induction immunotherapy of cancer.
Antibodies can be processed by the B- and T-cell systems and may lead to a selective activation of the immune system. The network structure of the immune system implicates the possibility of a selective immunization by the activation of idiotypic cascades. In a retrospective analysis, patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma, who had received MAb, against the cancer-associated antigen CA125 for diagnostic purposes, were analyzed for the production of anti-idiotypic antibodies, survival rate, and immunological effects. Furthermore, we started a prospective and randomized study for ovarian cancer patients, using a different antigen, TAG72, for the induction of idiotypic cascades. Our first results on 58 patients with advanced ovarian carcinomas showed that the induction of anti-idiotypic-antibodies against OC125 mimicking the TAA Class III CA125 leads to a prolongation of the survival rate, and, in extended stages, to an induction of antitumoral immunity, and that the induction of idiotypic cascades is also possible for different antigens like TAG72. Summarizing the activation of idiotypic network cascades seems to be a very effective way of intervention in the immune system of patients with advanced stages of ovarian carcinoma. A prospective study of the adjuvant approach seems to be necessary.
BACKGROUND: A prospective randomized controlled trial was conducted to compare the efficacy and side-effects of vaginal versus oral misoprostol in the medical management of incomplete miscarriage. METHODS: Two hundred and one patients who miscarried consented to randomization using computer-generated randomization model prior to treatment. A total of 800 microg of misoprostol was given either vaginally or orally to the randomized subjects. A second dose was repeated 4 h later if the product of conception had not been passed. RESULTS: The incidence of complete uterine evacuation following vaginal and oral misoprostol was similar [(58/95) 61.1% versus (67/103) 64.4%]. There was a significantly decreased incidence of diarrhoea [(12/95) 13.6% versus (62/103) 65.3%, P < 0.01] with the use of vaginal misoprostol. CONCLUSIONS: Vaginal misoprostol was as effective as oral misoprostol in medical uterine evacuation in patients with incomplete miscarriage. There was also a reduction in the incidence of diarrhoea with the use of vaginal misoprostol.
To test the efficacy of culturally targeted acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) prevention programs on ethnic minority street drug users, 669 African-American and Puerto Rican drug users were assigned to receive either the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) standard intervention or a culturally competent enhanced intervention in a quasi-experimental study. The standard intervention was a two-session educational program, while both the African-American and Puerto Rican enhanced interventions provided additional AIDS information in a culturally appropriate fashion. Although human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) risk behaviors, as measured by Bell's risk indices, decreased, there were no meaningful significant differences between interventions. However, participants who went into drug treatment programs showed greater reduction in HIV risk behavior. Cultural interventions may provide better outcome if they concentrate on getting participants into drug treatment.
This study examined and compared the effectiveness of two counseling interventions designed to reduce the HIV drug and sexual risk behaviors of 684 out-of-treatment drug users recruited from South Philadelphia, PA. All study participants received a standard intervention and one half were randomly assigned to also receive the enhanced intervention. The standard intervention provided HIV risk reduction education, HIV testing with pretest and posttest counseling, and training in condom use and needle cleaning. The enhanced intervention provided additional information on STD risk reduction. Both interventions were effective in influencing behavior change between baseline and 6-month follow-up. A higher proportion of persons reduced their drug risk behaviors compared to their sexual risk behaviors. As sexual risk behaviors are more resistant to change, there is a need for tailored interventions that target out-of-treatment drug users.
Many studies of interventions with high-risk populations have reported reductions in risk behaviors. To assess effectiveness of interventions, data are also needed on the characteristics of subjects lost to follow-up, and on follow-up risk behaviors for subjects who were not participants in the intervention. This paper reports on a study conducted in Harlem, New York, recruiting 1,770 injection drug users (IDUs) and sex partners of IDUs, randomly assigned to two interventions. Repeated-measures analyses for the two intervention groups and those who participated in no intervention indicated that all groups reported significant reductions in risk behaviors, with no group effect. Comparisons of those followed-up and not followed-up indicate that those followed-up were less likely to: be homeless, be Latinos, and to use "shooting galleries." The discussion focuses on the need to assess outcomes for all types of participants, and to distinguish the impact of interventions from other explanations for behavior changes.
This study compares the impact of a standard and an enhanced intervention on the needle-use behaviors reported by injection-drug users (IDUs) living in a low-seroprevalence area in the Midwest. Data on the drug- and needle-use practices of 381 IDUs completing a standard (n = 232) or an enhanced (n = 149) intervention who were followed-up five to nine months after a baseline interview were analyzed using bivariate and multivariate techniques. The results indicate that IDUs who participated in the enhanced intervention reported safer needle practices than standard intervention IDUs at follow-up. In addition, less frequent injectors were much more likely to adopt safer needle-use practices than were daily drug injectors, regardless of intervention track. The results suggest that more intensive interventions have advantages over minimalist efforts--in specific contexts. This finding has important implications for the HIV needle risk-reduction efforts targeting IDUs.
1. The effects of timolol alone and in combination with a fixed dose of hydrochlorothiazide and amiloride have been studied in a double-blind, controlled study in fifty-four patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. 2. After a 4 weeks placebo period patients were randomly assigned to enter groups receiving timolol alone (group A), hydrochlorothiazide + amiloride (group B) or timolol + hydrochlorothiazide + amiloride (group C). Each treatment was carried out for 6 weeks. 3. The use of timolol (10 mg), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg) and amiloride (2-5 mg) in a combination tablet given twice daily gave better control of blood pressure in patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension than did equivalent dosages of timolol alone or of hydrochlorothiazide and amiloride. 4. Clinical and laboratory side effects were minimal.
Three hundred and fifty-three asthmatic patients who remained symptomatic despite treatment with budesonide 800-1200 microg day(-1) (or equivalent) were randomized to a new combination therapy comprising salmeterol 50 microg and fluticasone propionate 250 microg (Seretide, Advair, Viani 50/250 microg) twice daily or budesonide 800 microg twice daily for 24 weeks. Patients kept daily records of their morning and evening peak expiratory flow (PEF), daytime and night-time symptom scores and daytime and night-time use of rescue salbutamol. Mean morning PEF increased by 451 min(-1) (baseline 361 l min(-1)) in the salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination (SFC) group and by 19 l min(-1) (baseline 358 l min(-1)) in the budesonide group over the 24 weeks. The adjusted mean morning PEF over weeks 1 to 24 was significantly greater in the SFC group, despite the > three-fold lower corticosteroid dose (406 vs. 380 l min(-1); P < 0.001). A significantly greater improvement in evening PEF was also seen in the SFC group (adjusted mean 416 vs. 398 l min(-1); P<0.001). SFC also provided significantly better control of daytime symptoms and a significantly greater reduction in the requirement for rescue salbutamol compared with budesonide. These results demonstrate that SFC 50/250 microg twice daily is superior to budesonide 800 microg twice daily in the management of patients with moderate to severe asthma who are symptomatic on their existing dose of corticosteroid.
This randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel group clinical trial compared the efficacy and safety of adding salmeterol xinafoate to concurrent inhaled beclomethasone dipropionate therapy with doubling the dose of beclomethasone dipropionate in patients experiencing symptoms on low-dose beclomethasone. Salmeterol added to low-dose beclomethasone was superior (p < or = 0.05) to doubling the dose of beclomethasone in improving peak expiratory flow (PEF) and forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), and in reducing symptoms of asthma, sleep loss, nighttime awakenings, and use of albuterol. Both treatment regimens had comparable safety profiles. In asthma patients inadequately controlled despite the use of low-dose inhaled corticosteroids (i.e., less than 400 microg per day), the addition of salmeterol may be a more effective treatment option than doubling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids.
A total of 132 adult asthmatics who were symptomatic on 500 microg x day(-1) inhaled beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) were studied in an open-label randomized, parallel group, 12 week, clinical trial. The addition of 12 microg formoterol fumarate solution aerosol (pressurized metered dose inhaler) b.i.d. to BDP at a dose of 500 microg x day(-1) was compared with a higher dose of 1,000 microg x day(-1) BDP. Mean morning premedication peak expiratory flow rate (PEF) during the final week of treatment (primary end-point) increased in both groups compared to baseline. The estimated treatment difference of 20.4 L x min(-1) (95% confidence interval 3.2-37.6) after 12 weeks of treatment was statistically significant (p<0.05) in favour of the formoterol/BDP group. The overall mean morning premedication PEF for the entire treatment period was higher in the formotero/BDP group (p=0.002). The overall number of puffs of rescue medication and asthma symptom scores were less in the formotero/BDP group (p<0.01). Safety and tolerability evaluations were satisfactory in both groups. In conclusion, the results suggest that the addition of formoterol fumarate to the existing dose of an inhaled corticosteroid should be considered as an alternative to increasing the dose of inhaled corticosteroid in the inadequately controlled asthmatic.
AIMS: To evaluate the efficacy of acamprosate in maintaining abstinence in weaned alcohol-dependent patients. DESIGN: A multicentre, double-blind, randomized control trial. Patients were individually randomly allocated to active or placebo conditions. Abstinence was assessed during a 6-month treatment period and after a 6-month follow-up period. SETTING: A community-based, outpatient alcohol rehabilitation programme. PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred and forty-six alcohol-dependent patients between the ages of 18 and 65 years were recruited immediately following acute, inpatient withdrawal treatment. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome measure was self-reported abstinence from alcohol since the previous sessions at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months following the start of treatment, with treatment taking place for a period of 6 months. FINDINGS: A significantly higher proportion of patients in the acamprosate group were abstinent after 3 months and 6 months of treatment. The percentage of patients with continuous abstinence at the end of the treatment period was almost double for the acamprosate group than for the placebo group (40.7% vs. 20.8%, respectively). Acamprosate significantly increased the retention of patients in the treatment programme. Six months after drug treatment ceased, the criterion of abstinence since the previous visit was reached by significantly more patients from the acamprosate group (43.4%) than from the placebo group (29.8%), but this difference was not statistically significant at the 3-month point after cessation of study medication. CONCLUSIONS: Acamprosate may be a useful pharmacological compound for the long-term treatment of alcohol-dependence when applied in a community-based rehabilitation programme.
BACKGROUND: Acamprosate is a newly registered drug that appears to reduce alcohol-drinking in both animal models and clinical conditions. METHOD: In order to assess the efficacy and safety of the drug in the treatment of detoxified alcoholics, we performed a 90-day double-blind trial comparing two dosages of acamprosate (1332 mg/day and 1998 mg/day). RESULTS: For all efficacy parameters, acamprosate appeared to be significantly superior to placebo, with a trend towards a better effect at the higher dosage. Furthermore, acamprosate appeared to be extremely safe. CONCLUSION: This study confirms that acamprosate could be an interesting adjuvant for maintaining abstinence in detoxified alcoholics.
A double-blind controlled study of the effects of buspirone on alcohol dependence and associated symptoms in ambulatory alcoholics showed a marked improvement in both treatment and control groups. However, significant differences in favor of the medication were observed in several psychopathological measures, but not in measures of alcohol consumption. Contrary to a majority of prior controlled trials of buspirone in alcoholics, subjects were not selected on the basis of comorbid generalized anxiety; rather, the study tested the hypothesis of a direct effect on craving and consumption, independent from an anxiolytic effect. This hypothesis was not confirmed.
The pooled results from our Veterans Affairs studies are presented for 99 men. The naltrexone-treated subjects reported a reduction in alcohol craving and drinking, as well as less euphoria when they ingested alcohol. Relapse rates were significantly lower for the naltrexone-treated subjects than they were for placebo-treated subjects. Together with the consistent results from other double-blind trials of naltrexone, we conclude that naltrexone is a safe and useful adjunct in the rehabilitation of alcohol-dependent patients. Although administration of naltrexone was shown to improve treatment outcome, subjects who attended all 12 research visits demonstrated larger treatment effects. These data suggest that the use of naltrexone as a pharmacological adjunct to psychosocial intervention is an effective treatment for alcohol dependence. The effectiveness of naltrexone may be improved by designing a treatment program that enhances compliance with the medication.
OBJECTIVE: Subjective effects of alcohol in alcoholics treated with naltrexone or placebo were compared. METHOD: In a previously reported double-blind clinical trial of 50 mg/day of naltrexone or placebo for treatment of alcoholism, 36 of 70 detoxified male veterans deviated from abstinence. Of these 36, 29 subsequently reported on the subjective effects of drinking during the trial. RESULTS: A larger proportion of naltrexone-treated subjects (seven of 12) than placebo-treated subjects (two of 17) reported that the "high" produced by alcohol during the study was significantly less than usual. The naltrexone-treated subjects also drank less alcohol than the placebo-treated subjects during the first drinking episode. There was no difference between groups in reported intoxication, craving, memory, or loss of temper. CONCLUSIONS: The lower alcohol consumption by the naltrexone-treated subjects may have resulted from naltrexone's blockage of the pleasure produced by alcohol.
The pooled results of 99 subjects from our Veterans Affairs population show that naltrexone-treated subjects had a greater reduction in alcohol craving, number of drinking days, and alcoholic relapse rates when compared with placebo-treated subjects. Based on our findings and results from other double-blind trials of naltrexone, we conclude that naltrexone is a safe and useful adjunct in the rehabilitation of alcohol-dependent patients. Increased baseline levels of psychological distress and craving as well as higher levels of somatic distress, anxiety, phobic anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive symptoms predicted an increased number of drinking days during the study. Significant interactions between naltrexone treatment, initial craving, and somatic distress suggest that naltrexone may be useful for subjects who present with high levels of craving and somatic symptoms.
In a one-year double-blind-treatment study with acamprosat (six months with and six months without substance) the efficiency of this new medicament could be proved. The number of relapses in the treatment group was significantly lower during the first 30 days with a trend to further 150 days. The substance caused very few side effects.
Our preliminary studies of the efficacy of lithium carbonate therapy for alcoholism under double-blind, placebo-controlled conditions demonstrated that alcoholics who took their assigned medication (lithium or placebo) for the first 6 months after discharge from an inpatient rehabilitation program were more likely to abstain from any alcohol use for 18 months following discharge than were alcoholics who took their medication erratically or not at all. Attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings was also associated with medication adherence. We applied a structural equation model to data on the relationships between medication adherence, AA meeting attendance and abstinent outcome to clarify whether medication adherence or AA meeting attendance better explains the positive-outcome "adherence effect" we observed. Both medication adherence and AA meeting attendance evidenced direct and independent influences on abstinent outcome: medication adherence showed a small direct influence, and AA meeting attendance showed a much larger, independent influence.
Ninety-seven alcohol-dependent patients were treated for 12 weeks in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluating naltrexone and two manual guided psychotherapies in the treatment of alcohol dependence. Patients were randomized to receive either naltrexone or placebo and either coping skills/relapse prevention therapy or a supportive therapy designed to support the patient's own efforts at abstinence without teaching specific coping skills. Naltrexone proved superior to placebo in measures of drinking and alcohol-related problems, including abstention rates, number of drinking days, relapse, and severity of alcohol-related problems. Medication interacted with the type of psychotherapy received. The cumulative rate of abstinence was highest for patients treated with naltrexone and supportive therapy. For those patients who initiated drinking, however, patients who received naltrexone and coping skills therapy were the least likely to relapse.
A prospective double-blind placebo-controlled trial conducted during a 6-month period showed that lithium carbonate was no better than placebo in producing total abstinence in patients with alcoholism, regardless of whether they were depressed. A high dropout rate, the effect of compliance, and difficulties in measuring improvement in these patients impose some limitations in interpreting the results of this study.
A total of 348 consecutive primary alcoholics entering an alcoholism treatment program comprised Group 1 (172 men who were offered disulfiram and agreed to take it) and Group 2 (176 who were eligible to take the drug but refused). Information was gathered at the time of intake into the program through personal interviews with patients and two resource persons. The clinical course in the 12 months after discharge was determined by follow-up interviews with patients and one resource person. The two groups were demographically similar at intake and there were no significant differences in outcome. However, at intake those men who agreed to take disulfiram and subsequently did well were more affluent, more likely to be married and less likely to have spent time in jail prior to treatment, and drank less often than those men who refused. Thus, although agreeing to take disulfiram was not associated with an improved outcome overall, men with more social stability and less pervasive problems may be the ones most likely to benefit from the drug.
The efficacy of lithium therapy for alcoholism was examined in 84 alcoholic volunteers admitted for rehabilitation. Subjects were randomly assigned to a lithium or placebo treatment condition for 18 months, and were reinterviewed monthly to document their compliance, drinking status, and mood. Two separate factors contributed to abstinent outcome: therapeutic serum lithium levels (greater than or equal to 0.4 mEq/L) and medication compliance. Recommendations are proposed for studying compliance effects in future treatment studies.
One hundred twenty-four men were randomly assigned to receive disulfiram with a riboflavin marker or riboflavin alone. During a one year follow-up urine specimens were collected at each visit and analyzed for riboflavin. There was a strong relationship between excellent attendance and infrequent drinking. For subjects taking disulfiram there was a high correlation between a subject submitting 15 or more positive urines during follow-up and infrequent drinking. For the disulfiram patients there was also a strong relationship between continuous usage of disulfiram and infrequent drinking. However, the correlation between percentage of urine specimens positive for the riboflavin marker and infrequent drinking was slight. This occurred because a person who was drinking tended to return for follow-up only when he was not drinking and thus submitted only a few specimens of which the majority were positive. We conclude that (1) excellent attendance, (2) submission of a large number of positive urines and (3) a period of continuous compliance to the disulfiram regimen were highly associated with infrequent drinking.
To evaluate the efficacy of lithium in chronic alcoholism, we enrolled 47 male alcoholics in a prospective double-blind two-period crossover study. Nineteen subjects completed the 6-mo study during which they received lithium and placebo each for a 3-mo period. Self-reported alcohol intake and social and psychological factors were monitored. Three subjects claimed that they did not drink during the study. Mean self-reported alcohol intake of the remaining 16 was less during lithium therapy but was also less during the first treatment period. Neither of these differences reached statistical significance. The nine depressed patients, diagnosed from their profiles of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory did not consume significantly less alcohol and did not change scores for depression significantly during lithium therapy. We could not demonstrate the lithium therapy was of benefit in our group of alcoholic patients.
One hundred twenty-eight alcoholic men were assigned randomly to receive either a regular dose of disulfiram (250 mg), a pharmacologically inactive dose (1 mg), or no disulfiram. There were no statistically significant differences among the three treatment groups in total abstinence, percentage of drinking days, days worked, family stability (living with same relative), or percent of scheduled appointments kept. However, 21% of those who received the regular dose of disulfiram and 25% who received the pharmacologically inactive dose remained abstinent, whereas only 12% of those who received no disulfiram did so. These results indicate that disulfiram may be of limited value in the treatment of alcoholism, fear of the disulfiram-ethanol reaction is important in preventing drinking, and patients willing to take disulfiram are more likely to be abstinent if given the drug. We also found that complete abstinence correlated significantly with compliance and obtaining employment.
Ten alcoholics implanted with disulfiram had longer periods of abstinence after treatment than did 10 alcoholics implanted with placebo; 7 of the disulfiram-implanted patients experienced a disulfiram-ethanol reaction in uncontrolled drinking situations, while none of the placebo-implanted patients did.
Lithium therapy has been shown to have a therapeutic influence in reducing the drinking and incapacity by alcohol in depressive alcoholics in a prospective double-blind placebo-controlled trial conducted over one year, but it had no significant effect on non-depressed patients. Patients in the trial treated by placebo had significantly greater alcoholic morbidity if they were depressive than if they were non-depressive.
In an effort to examine the placebo, psychological deterrent, and pharmacological deterrent effects associated with implanted disulfiram, subjects were given either disulfiram implants or sham operations. Ethanol challenges elicited no disulfiram-ethanol reactions (DERs), indicating that at the time of the challenge neither a pharmacological deterrent nor a placebo effect was operating. Of the patients who resumed drinking, only those with disulfiram implants experienced DERs. Sham operation subjects continued to drink after their first post-challenge drink; four of five disulfiram implant recidivists remained abstinent following their experience of a DER. It is concluded that the pharmacological deterrent effect of the disulfiram implant may have been underestimated in previous reports.
We compared the efficacy of the prokinetic agent cisapride with that of Gaviscon (an alginate/alkaline compound) plus Carobel (carob seed flour) in the treatment of gastrooesophageal reflux (GOR). Fifty infants with confirmed GOR received either oral cisapride (0.8 mg/kg/day) or Gaviscon plus Carobel for one month in a randomised, parallel group study. Parental evaluations, diary scores, and 24 hour lower oesophageal pH recordings before and at the end of each treatment were compared. In the cisapride group 14/26 (53%) were considered better by their parents compared with 19/24 (79%) of those who received Gaviscon plus Carobel. Diary scores, range (0.00-1.00), improved in both groups with the median change being greater in the Gaviscon plus Carobel group (-0.21) than the cisapride group (-0.15). Five of 17 pH variables had significantly improved from baseline in infants who had received cisapride compared with 11/17 in those receiving Gaviscon plus Carobel. However, unpaired analysis of diary and pH data showed no significant differences between the two groups. We conclude that first line treatment of GOR with cisapride is no more effective than conventional treatment with Gaviscon plus Carobel.
Twenty-nine infants (2-4 months old), with pathological gastroesophageal reflux assessed by 24-h esophageal pH monitoring, were studied. Cisapride or placebo was randomly added to positional treatment, prone-antiTrendelenburg position, which was applied to all infants. The pH monitoring was repeated after 13-16 days of treatment and revealed a significant improvement in both groups for most parameters. But the number of reflux episodes lasting longer than 5 min and the total number of reflux episodes had not decreased significantly in the placebo group. Only in the number of reflux episodes lasting longer than 5 min was improvement during treatment significantly greater in the cisapride group. This suggests cisapride both prevented reflux and improved esophageal clearance. These results suggest that in addition to other therapeutic measurements, such as positional treatment (which was previously demonstrated to be effective in this age group), cisapride might be of benefit in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
The relevance of the upper gastrointestinal motility-stimulating effects of cisapride for the treatment of excessive regurgitation and vomiting in infants was studied in 137 patients aged less than 1 year. They were treated with placebo or with cisapride, 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg three times daily, for up to four weeks. In a dose-dependent fashion, cisapride significantly reduced the frequency and severity of regurgitation: after four weeks of treatment at 0.15 to 0.2 mg/kg, only about 20% of infants still had moderate or severe regurgitation, compared with about two thirds of those treated with placebo. Although only a few patients were followed up, the duration of treatment (four weeks) appeared to be long enough to minimize relapse. Side effects were limited to phenomena indicative of stimulated bowel motility.
Twenty children (age range 75 days-47 months) with reflux oesophagitis entered a random double blind trial in which they received either Cisapride (Janssen Pharmaceutical Ltd), a new prokinetic agent, or an identical placebo syrup. Diagnosis of gastro-oesophageal reflux was made by measurement of intraluminal oesophageal pH combined with manometry. Oesophagitis was assessed in all patients by histological examination of mucosal specimens taken during oesophagogastroduodenoscopy. Manometry, pH test, and endoscopy with biopsy examination were repeated at the end of the treatment period. Seventeen patients completed the trial, eight of whom were taking the drug and nine the placebo. Mean total clinical score and post-prandial reflux time (% of reflux) significantly improved in patients in the group given Cisapride but not in the group given placebo. Furthermore, there was a significant improvement of the histological oesophagitis score only in the children in the group given Cisapride, whereas placebo was ineffective. It is concluded that Cisapride is a useful agent both for the relief of symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reflux and for the healing of peptic oesophagitis in infancy.
The number and type of activated patient problems and the number of nursing interventions in computer-supported and manually-generated nursing care plans for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infected patients hospitalized for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) were compared. There were significantly more activated patient problems (p = 0.005) and nursing interventions (p = 0.002) listed using the computer-supported care planning system. The top ranked problems in both systems were reflective of the clinical presentation of acute PCP. The problem, potential for increased risk of infection, was activated more frequently using the computer-supported care plan. There were no significant differences in patient outcome as measured by functional status and patients' self-ratings of physical condition at hospital discharge.
There is marked debate about whether outcomes of care, particularly mortality, vary as a function of hospital and physician experience with a disease. This issue is especially important with respect to AIDS because greater than 200,000 individuals have now been diagnosed with this disease. We analyzed discharge data for 3,126 persons with AIDS who had Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and who were treated at one of 73 New York City hospitals in 1987. In-hospital mortality was 25%. Factors associated with higher chances of short-term death were older age, being black, not having private health insurance, and being severely ill. A logistic regression model indicated that after controlling for differences in patient and hospital characteristics, the chances of death decreased when care was given at hospitals with higher caseloads of patients with Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Our findings suggest that hospital experience may decrease mortality in this subset of patients with human immunodeficiency virus disease, although it is unknown whether this is due to differences in quality of care.
In an open multicentre study the efficacy and safety of fluconazole versus ketoconazole were evaluated in the treatment of 46 pediatric patients with oropharyngeal candidiasis and AIDS or HIV infection. Twenty-four subjects received oral fluconazole in a dosage of 3 mg/kg/day and 22 subjects received oral ketoconazole in a dosage of 7 mg/kg/day. The treatment duration ranged from 5 to 49 days. Results showed that fluconazole and ketoconazole have comparable efficacy and safety in the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in HIV-infected children. Patients treated with fluconazole had higher clinical and mycological cure rates at the end of therapy (88% and 71% respectively) than those treated with ketoconazole (81% and 57% respectively). One case of drug-related side effects (diarrhea and abdominal pain) in a patient receiving ketoconazole resulted in discontinuation of treatment. Follow-up examinations 2 and 4 weeks post-treatment showed a comparably high rate of relapse in both patient groups.
To determine the efficacy and toxicity of two systemically active antifungal agents in the treatment of buccal and oesophageal candidiasis 111 HIV-infected patients with microscopically-confirmed candidiasis were randomized to receive either 200 mg itraconazole once a day or 200 mg ketoconazole twice a day for 28 days in a double blind study. After 1 week of treatment, 75 and 82% of the patients on itraconazole and ketoconazole, respectively, had responded clinically. After 4 weeks of treatment, this had risen to 93% in each group. One patient discontinued itraconozole because of toxicity (rash), five patients discontinued ketaconazole (two nausea, two hepatotoxicity and one rash). Despite successful clinical and mycological clearance, 80% patients had a further episode of candidosis within the next 3 months.
Thirty-nine adult patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection and oral candidiasis were randomly assigned to receive either one fluconazole capsule (100 mg) or five clotrimazole troches (10 mg each) daily for 14 days. Among 36 evaluable patients, clinical resolution rates were 100 and 65%, respectively (P = 0.018). Mycological eradication rates were 75 and 20%, respectively (P = 0.004). Fluconazole-treated patients were more likely to remain disease free during follow-up than those treated with clotrimazole (P = 0.014 at 2 weeks). Prolonged clinical responses correlated with mycological eradication at the end of therapy (P = 0.043).
Fluconazole 50 mg daily for 14-28 days was effective in the treatment of patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex with severe oropharyngeal and oesophageal candidiasis. Of 24 patients entered, 17 (81%), including seven with oesophageal candidiasis, were clinically cured and two (9.5%) improved at the end of treatment. Following clinical cure, 14 patients were entered into the double-blind phase of the study, where fluconazole (150 mg) or placebo capsules were given once weekly. Treatment was double blind. Fluconazole 150 mg once weekly was found to be effective in maintaining patients both clinically and mycologically free of oropharyngeal candidiasis.
In a randomised, double-blind study the efficacy and toxicity of oral fluconazole 50 mg daily and ketoconazole 200 mg daily were compared for the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and AIDS-related complex (ARC). 20 episodes (18 patients) were treated with fluconazole and 20 episodes (19 patients) with ketoconazole. Pretreatment clinical features and laboratory test results were similar in both groups. 17 episodes (85%) in the fluconazole group and 16 (80%) in the ketoconazole group could be evaluated. There was clinical cure at the end of therapy in all fluconazole-treated and 12 of 16 (75%) ketoconazole-treated episodes. Cultures were negative at the end of therapy in 87% of the fluconazole group and 69% of the ketoconazole group. 1 patients stopped taking fluconazole because of severe nausea. 1 of 18 fluconazole-treated and 4 of 19 ketoconazole-treated patients had transient rises in alanine or aspartate aminotransferase. Fluconazole seemed more effective than ketoconazole in the treatment of oral thrush among AIDS and ARC patients.
This report describes a pilot study of a nursing intervention to increase adherence to combination therapy. The intervention was based on motivational interviewing (MI). Participants completed a baseline assessment using the computer-administered self-interview with audio (ACASI) data collection method and then were randomly assigned to the MI intervention or control condition. Nurse counselors met with participants in the MI intervention group for three adherence sessions. Two months following baseline, participants completed a follow-up assessment. Mean scores on ratings of missed medications were lower for participants in the intervention group than those in the control group. Although there were no significant differences in the number of medications missed during the past 4 days, participants in the MI group reported being more likely to follow the medication regimen as prescribed by their health care provider. The pilot study provided useful information about the acceptability of ACASI and the adequacy of intervention procedures. The results of this pilot study show promise for the use of MI as an intervention to promote adherence to antiretroviral medications.
A small pilot trial of a multicomponent (behavioral strategies, simplified patient information, and social support) and multidisciplinary (cognitive-behavioral therapy and nursing) medication adherence intervention was conducted for HIV-infected adults prescribed antiretrovirals. Patients (N = 33) were randomly assigned to the intervention condition or standard care. Compared to the control group, patients in the intervention condition had significantly higher self-efficacy to communicate with clinic staff (p = .04) and to continue treatment (p = .04), were significantly more likely to be using behavioral and cognitive strategies (p = .01 and p = .04), reported significantly higher life satisfaction (p = .03), reported significantly increased feelings of social support (p = .04), and showed a trend toward an increase in taking their medications on schedule (p = .06). The intervention, however, did not appear to affect health-related anxiety or to significantly improve adherence to dose. Implications for future intervention planning are discussed.
OBJECTIVE: Weight loss in HIV-infected patients is extremely common and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Decreased testosterone concentrations occur commonly in patients with HIV disease and are associated with weight loss. This study assessed the effect of testosterone therapy on HIV associated weight loss in patients with AIDS. METHODS: Forty HIV-seropositive patients with CD4+ counts of < 2 x 10(5)/l and weight loss greater than 5% of usual body weight were randomized in a double-blind manner to receive 200 mg of testosterone cypionate of placebo intramuscularly every 2 weeks for 3 months. Patients were then crossed to receive the alternate treatment for the next 3 months. Outcome variables included weight, skin fold measurement, a quality-of-life questionnaire, Karnofsky score, T-cell subset analysis, complete blood count, routine blood chemistry measurements and free testosterone concentration. RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients entered the study. Of these, 35 completed the first 3-month period (18 on placebo, 17 on testosterone) and 23 completed the whole 6 month trial. Analysis of these 23 patients did not show any significant differences between testosterone and placebo treatment. Analysis of the first 3 months only for the 35 patients who completed it did not show any significant difference between the effects of testosterone and placebo treatment on weight gain. Patients treated with testosterone reported improved overall well-being (P = 0.03) and a trend towards increased muscle strength (P = 0.08). There was no difference between the two groups in terms of side-effects or other effects on hematopoetic, liver, renal, or immune function. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with testosterone cypionate compared with placebo did not result in significant weight gain. Testosterone supplementation did appear to produce an improved overall sense of well-being and possibly some increases in muscle strength. This randomized, double-blinded study does not confirm the results of other recent studies which show potential benefits of testosterone and its analogs when used as a treatment for weight loss in HIV-positive patients.
OBJECTIVES: To analyze the dynamics of both HIV-1-specific CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses during structured treatment interruptions (STIs) in chronically HIV-1-infected (CHI) patients and to correlate them with the viral set point achieved. METHODS: Forty-five early-stage CHI patients who were on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for at least 1 year and underwent STI were included. Plasma viral load (VL), peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) lymphoproliferative (LPR) response to HIV p24 protein, and HIV-1 epitope-specific interferon-gammarelease from CD8 T cells were measured over a minimum study period of 2 years. RESULTS: VL set point during final STI was both significantly lower than, and positively correlated to, baseline VL (P < 0.0001: mean VL reduction 0.77 log10, and r = 0.42, P = 0.004, respectively). CD4 LPRs to p24 increased significantly (P = 0.001) between day 0 of the first STI cycle and 4th STI but decreased thereafter. VL set point during final STI was significantly and negatively correlated with LPRs to p24 at both 2nd STI and 4th STI. Nevertheless, at week 52, 12 weeks after the end of the last STI, LPRs were weak and transient in all patients and were not correlated with VL set point. Moreover, the magnitude and breadth of HIV-1-specific CD8 T-cell responses increased significantly (P < 0.0001) between day 0 and week 52. The largest increases occurred during the final STI. Even though VL reached set point by week 12 of the final STI, HIV-1-specific CD8 T-cell responses did not stabilize but rather increased until the end of the follow-up and did not correlate with plasma VL (r = 0.01, P = 0.88). CONCLUSIONS: STIs do not lead to control of viral replication in CHI patients, probably due to the fact that boosted CTL responses lack strong and durable helper T-cell responses. To reset the VL set point, new approaches that effectively augment and preserve helper T-cell responses should be investigated.
Markers of maturation and activation were measured on peripheral CD4+ T cells in chronically HIV-1-infected patients in a randomized, controlled pilot study of structured treatment interruption (STI). Eight subjects underwent 2 cycles of 1 month off and 1 month on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), followed by a final 3-month interruption. During STI, CD4+ T-cell percentage remained relatively stable in 4 of 8 subjects. The remaining 4 STI subjects had significant rapid decline in CD4+ T-cell percentage during STI, followed by return to pre-STI baseline while on HAART. Changes in overall CD4+ T-cell percentage corresponded with fluctuations in the CD45RA+CCR7+ naive and CD45RA-CCR7+ central memory subsets. Subjects with variable CD4+ T-cell percentages tended to have higher pre-HAART plasma HIV-1 RNA set-points and experienced higher levels of plasma HIV-1 RNA rebound during STI. These results suggest that interruptions should be avoided whenever possible in patients on HAART with high plasma HIV-1 RNA set-points.
OBJECTIVE: The influence of structured treatment interruption on effector/memory CD8 T cell dynamics was analysed in chronic HIV-infected patients showing a rapid or delayed viral rebound. DESIGN: Structured treatment interruption consisted of at least one month of discontinuation, followed by highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) resumption. Two groups of HIV structured treatment interruption patients were selected on the basis of plasma viral HIV-RNA value (> 30 000 copies/ml, branched DNA): group A (n = 14), patients with a rapid viral rebound (within one month) and group B (n = 6), patients with a delayed or no viral rebound (after a minimum of 4 months). METHODS: A clinical and immunological follow-up was performed at HAART suspension (t 0), one month from suspension (t 1), at HAART resumption (t 2), and 30 days from resumption (t 3). RESULTS: A sustained viral rebound was observed in group A patients, showing a rapid expansion of circulating CD8 T lymphocytes. In this group, the frequencies of CD8 T cells releasing IFN-gamma after mitogen-induced or Gag-specific stimulation were highly increased after HAART discontinuation. Nevertheless, these CD8 T lymphocytes were mainly composed of pre-terminally differentiated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) expressing a CCR7 CD27 CD45RA phenotype and a reduced amount of perforin. In contrast, group B patients showed no significant changes in immunological parameters during a prolonged drug-free period. CONCLUSION: These data indicate that monitoring CD8 T cell dynamics during structured treatment interruption could be clinically relevant, and new therapeutic strategies should aim qualitatively to restore CTL effector functions.
There is a continuing search for better ways to use existing drugs against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). One idea is to use short therapy interruptions to "autovaccinate" HIV-infected patients. A group of 13 chronically HIV-infected patients enrolled in a trial of such so-called structured treatment interruptions (STIs) were intensively studied with respect to their viral load (VL) and HIV-specific CD8+ T-cell (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte [CTL]) responses. We found that 10 of the 13 patients had plateau VLs after STIs that were lower than their pretreatment VLs. While viral rebound rates became lower over STIs, there were no changes in clearance rates. Although numbers of CTLs did increase over the same time that viral rebounds decreased, there was no correlation between CTL count and either viral rebound rates or clearance rates. Finally, we asked whether absolute numbers of or changes in numbers of CTLs predict plateau VLs after STIs. No measure of CTLs was able to predict plateau VLs. Thus, there was no signature in these data of an important contribution to virological control from HIV-specific CD8+ T lymphocytes.
Highly active antiretroviral therapies (HAART) represent a major advance in the treatment of HIV infection. Although with HAART a substantial suppression of viral replication can be obtained, eradication of the virus from the body cannot be achieved. Therefore, HIV-infected subjects have to be treated for the rest of their lives. Long term treatment will increase the frequency of: i) drug-related side effects; ii) onset of drug-resistant viral strains; iii) non-adherence of the patients to the treatment. Structured treatment interruptions (STI)-HAART might represent a feasible alternative and preliminary studies have shown that STI-HAART might induce immune control in patients treated in the early stage of infection. This regimen does not produce similar effects in patients treated during the chronic phase of the infection. However, there are some clinical data suggesting a possible role of hydroxyurea (HU) in inducing control of HIV replication in patients with established infection. In this manuscript in vitro and in vivo data indicating that HU might play a major role in the setting of STI-HAART will be presented.
PURPOSE: To study whether and under what circumstances HIV can be controlled in chronically infected patients. METHOD: Nine patients treated with hydroxyurea and didanosine (PANDAs) were compared with 7 patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) during an 8-week treatment interruption. Both groups had similar baseline viral load, CD4 count, and length of treatment. Treatment was resumed if viral rebound >10,000 copies/mL (virological failure) or CD4 count decrease below 200 cells/mm(3) (immunological failure) occurred in two consecutive measurements. RESULTS: None of the PANDAs failed. Viral rebound was spontaneously contained, and CD4 count remained stable. Four out of 7 patients in the HAART group failed to control HIV by week 6 and had to restart therapy due to either viremia rebound or CD4 decrease. Before therapy interruption, the PANDAs had a vigorous HIV-specific T cell immune response (median CD4VIR 1.2%), while the HAART-treated patients did not (median CD4VIR 0.2%) (CD4VIR represents the percentage of HIV-specific CD4 subpopulation expressing IFN-gamma within the total CD4 population [CD3+, CD4+, IFN-gamma+]). This difference was statistically significant (p =.002). CONCLUSION: This study shows that HIV can be controlled during therapy interruption in patients with established infection, and that control of viral replication correlates with vigorous anti-HIV specific immune responses.
Structured treatment interruption strategies may help overcome problems of highly active antiretroviral therapy, but might also represent a cause of stress. We present data that indicate a psychological benefit from structured treatment interruption. Although some disturbances appear at the resumption of therapy, no definitive problems are found that preclude such therapeutic approaches from a psychological perspective. However, a close follow-up of patients during interruption periods is advisable to avoid difficulties reported at treatment resumption presenting a risk to patients' health.
Vitamin A administered to children infected with the human immunodeficiency virus before influenza vaccination in a double-blind randomized study did not enhance vaccine serologic responses but did dampen the increase in the human immunodeficiency virus viral load 14 days after immunization (vitamin A, decrease of 0.13 +/- 0.09 log(10) copies/mL; placebo, increase of 0.14 +/- 0.08, P =.02).
This is a discussion of the results of a systematic review of 22 articles examining the effect of massage on relaxation, comfort, and sleep. The most consistent effect of massage was reduction in anxiety. Eight of 10 original research studies reported that massage significantly decreased anxiety or perception of tension. Seven of 10 studies found that massage produced physiologic relaxation, as indicated by significant changes in the expected direction in one or more physiologic indicators. In the three studies in which the effect of massage on discomfort was investigated, it was found to be effective in reducing pain. In only three studies was the effect of massage on sleep examined. The methods for measuring sleep were unclear in two of the studies, and results were inconclusive in the other. Further research is needed to investigate the effect of massage on discomfort and promoting sleep.

Adopting an historical and international perspective, this article explores and analyses the relationship and controversy between pharmacists and dispensing doctors in South Africa. In order to gain a better insight into this troublesome relationship, a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods has been employed. The findings reveal a deep ongoing sense of competition, which is manifest in the form of public debate and continuous attempts to protect professional task domains. Most of the pharmacists interviewed in this study mentioned the "dispensing doctor" as the main problem facing the community pharmacist in South Africa. Meanwhile, the medical profession, as a united front, is fiercely protecting its "inherent" right to dispense medicines. Using the South African scenario, issues such as occupational task boundaries, "business" versus "professional" systems as well as the role of the state are discussed in relation to professional dominance, jurisdiction and autonomy.

During a prospective clinical study the diagnostic value of the two non-invasive examinations colour-coded duplex ultrasound (Duplex) and fluid crystal contact thermography (LCCT) was investigated in relation to phlebography, the standard examination for the diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), in 112 patients with proximal femur fractures. In 19% of the patients, DVT was diagnosed by phlebography, with the main localisation in the lower leg in 19 of 21 (90%) thromboses. With a negative prediction value of 83%, Duplex is less suitable than LCCT under such difficult examination conditions as the early postoperative period. The specificity of Duplex is 95%, but the sensitivity only 18%. The specificity of LCCT is 85% and the sensitivity 75%. Considering the frequency of postoperative DVT after surgery on the legs, especially hip surgery, a postoperative screening for DVT should become mandatory. LCCT has proved to be a suitable, cheap, non-invasive examination with a negative prediction value of 94%.

PURPOSE: Blepharitis, an intrinsic eyelid inflammation with crusting and irritation, presents a great problem for patients wearing contact lenses. An important part of blepharitis therapy is eyelid hygiene, including the use of either soap, dilute baby shampoo, or commercial lid scrubs. In this study, a comparison was made between these three cleaning regimens in a group of 25 patients, 80% of whom (20/25) wore contact lenses.
METHODS: Patients used commercial eyelid scrub on right eyelids and a hypo-allergenic bar soap on left eyelids. Patient symptoms, slit lamp findings, and overall preferences were determined at the end of 4 months. A subgroup of 10 patients using lid scrub on right eyelids and dilute baby shampoo on left eyelids was followed for an additional 3 months.
RESULTS: At the end of 4 months, 24% (6/25) of the patients noted no difference between soap and lid scrub, but 89% (17/19) of the others preferred the lid scrub. In the group using baby shampoo, 50% (5/10) noted no difference in 3 months, but 80% (4/5) of the remaining patients preferred the lid scrub.
CONCLUSIONS: All patients improved in slit lamp findings with all three regimens, and patient preference was overwhelmingly in favor of the lid scrub regimen for convenience and ease of use.

CRD SUMMARY: This review looked at the effect on heart rate of supplementary fish oils. The authors concluded that fish oils lower the heart rate, particularly in people with higher baseline heart rate and in those taking fish oils for a longer duration. The review was generally well conducted, but differences in the results between studies weaken conclusions over all populations and interventions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of teaching problem-solving skills to caregivers of stroke patients. The authors found weak evidence for a positive effect of problem-solving interventions versus usual care. Several limitations, including poorly reported inclusion criteria, the possibility of language and publication bias and the lack of consideration of the validity assessment, render the authors' conclusions unreliable.
This meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate the effect of statins on the lipid profile in pediatric and adolescent patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Randomized, double-blind, controlled trials comparing statins with placebo were identified through electronic and manual search; percent reductions from baseline were calculated for various lipid parameters. Standardized mean differences (effect size) with 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated for each study and pooled effect size was calculated. A total of 6 studies were included in the meta-analysis. As compared to placebo, statins caused a significant decrease in total cholesterol (TC) [-3.11% (95% CI -3.46 to -2.99)], low-density lipoprotein (LDL) [-4.01% (95% CI -4.27 to -3.81)], triglyceride (TG) [-1.41 (95% CI -1.66 to -1.26)] and a significant increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) [1.12 (95% CI 0.73 1.13)]. In conclusion, statins were shown to have good efficacy for the treatment of FH in children.

This study examined the influence of optimism on pain medication use in adolescents with sickle cell disease (n=27; 18 females, 9 males). Participants completed a baseline measure of optimism and an average of 100 daily-diary assessments of pain severity and medication use. Results indicated that adolescents who experienced more severe pain used more analgesic and opioid medications. Optimism was a significant moderator of the relation between pain and opioid-medication use. At medium and high levels of optimism, pain was positively related to opioid use, but at low levels of optimism, the same relation was not present, suggesting that more optimistic adolescents are better able to match their medication use to their pain severity. Future research should examine how other psychosocial factors might influence pain medication use in adolescents and adults who experience pain, and clinicians should take into account psychosocial factors when working with pain populations.

The effect of propranolol (0.1 mg/kg intravenously followed by 320 mg given over 27 hour orally) on serum levels of creatine kinase enzyme was studied in a randomized trial involving 95 patients seen within 12 hours of onset of symptoms of uncomplicated myocardial infarction. In 15 patients who were treated with propranolol within 4 hours of onset, and who eventually developed pathological Q waves, peak measured enzyme levels were 27% (P less than 0.0125) lower than in 19 control patients who were also seen within 4 hours of the onset but had no specific treatment. Total calculated enzyme appearance was also lower in the treated patients (reduced 25%, P less than 0.05) as was the calculated rate of the appearance (33%, P less than 0.005). No significant difference was found for treated compared with control patients entering the trial more than 4 hours after the onset of chest pain. This evidence suggests that propranolol may reduce the size of uncomplicated infarctions if it is given intravenously within 4 hours of the onset.

Terazosin, a new selective long-acting alpha1-adrenergic blocking agent, has been shown to be an effective once-daily antihypertensive agent in four of five randomized double-blind placebo-controlled studies of patients with mild to moderate hypertension. In one trial, 24-h monitoring revealed that terazosin produced a sustained blood pressure lowering effect throughout the day. In three fixed-dose trials, steady patterns of blood pressure response during maintenance therapy indicated that tolerance to terazosin did not develop. Favourable changes in the plasma lipid profile were observed, while laboratory data suggested the development of haemodilution. Overall, terazosin was well tolerated. Asthenia, dizziness and peripheral oedema were significantly more common in patients treated with terazosin than with placebo.

This paper presents a follow-up at 4 y of formerly colicky infants and controls, with respect to behaviour, temperament, eating and sleeping habits, psychosomatic complaints, number of hospital stays, growth and "family climate". There were no differences between the two groups in most parameters studied. However, ex-colicky children displayed more negative emotions according to the temperament scale. There were also more negative moods during meals, and more reported stomach-ache. Although relationships regarding crying and mother-infant interaction remain extremely complex, the findings point toward a possible temperamental contribution to the pathogenesis of the infantile colic syndrome.

Pro-choice attitudes among undergraduates were assessed to determine the extent of anti-abortion sentiments during President Reagan's first term in office, which was marked by his support of the anti-abortion issue as well as by increased media coverage of the right-to-life movement. Self-administered questionnaires were completed by 840 participants enrolled in introductory psychology classes at a university in central Texas during the week prior to the presidential election of 1984. Students were asked if they would approve or disapprove of abortion under four different circumstances. Results indicated that the majority of both males and females were in favor of allowing abortion under all four conditions.

CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated psychological interventions with a large face-to-face component for treatment-resistant depression. The authors concluded that there is a lack of evidence and further research is urgently needed. This conclusion is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that excisional treatments for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia are associated with small risks of pregnancy-related morbidities. It is difficult to comment on the strength of the evidence since the quality of the included studies was not assessed and limited study details were reported. In addition, as some studies might have been missed, the reliability of the authors' conclusions is also weakened.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the surgical management of patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. The authors found that there were insufficient data to draw conclusions about different types of surgery for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Despite the limitations of this review, overall, the authors' conclusions reflect the poor quality of the included studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed educational interventions for surgical patients. The authors concluded that there was some evidence of the effectiveness of educational interventions, but more research is required. The review was limited by the lack of duplication in the review process and the lack of a quality assessment. There was insufficient evidence to support the authors' conclusion regarding effectiveness.
The following article is addresses the applications and functions of music therapy in the acute and rehabilitative phases of treatment of adult cancer patients. It is based on a literature review with a focus on the state of empirical research in the oncology sector of music therapy and consequences for the concepts of music therapy. First the basic aspects of music therapy treatment are explained to clarify the different research methods and to examine the special demands of oncology patients. Furthermore, a brief summary of the approaches of music therapy research in the most renowned educational institutions in Germany are outlined. The results of the studies and case histories are summarized and evaluated and provide the basis for the conclusions and recommendations for the music therapeutic practice in oncology.

Teenage fertility rates in the UK are amongst the highest in Europe and have not altered significantly in the last 15 years, but the proportion of births outside marriage has risen rapidly. In this study we used longitudinal data from the National Child Development Study (NCDS) to investigate the social, economic and educational backgrounds of young parents. The analysis showed there to be striking variations in the probabilities of becoming young parents but not with respect to whether the child was born within or outside marriage. Young mothers and fathers were more likely to come from economically disadvantaged families and to have lower educational attainment. Teenage mothers were more likely to have mothers who had a child in her teens and were more likely to have exhibited higher levels of emotional problems particularly in adolescence. Young women whose educational attainment scores deteriorated between childhood and adolescence had particularly high probabilities of becoming young mothers. For some teenage motherhood was unintended and the result of unprotected intercourse whilst other men and women who subsequently become young parents had expressed a preference for early parenthood whilst still at school.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found no evidence to suggest that supplementation of infant formula with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids affects the growth of term infants. Although the results provided support this, the limited literature search and poor reporting of review methodology make it difficult to verify this conclusion.
The effects of metoprolol, administered in the early stages of acute myocardial infarction was studied in 126 patients. Patients were treated in a double-blind randomized fashion, with metoprolol -15 mg, intravenously followed by 100 mg twice daily for 15 days or placebo, with a mean delay of 8.1 hours from onset of symptoms. All patients underwent 24 hour Holter monitoring on days 1, 5 and 15 after randomization. Although there was no antiarrhythmic effect on day 1, metoprolol reduced the number of hours with warning arrhythmias (greater than 30 ventricular ectopics/hour, any R/T ectopics or ventricular tachycardia) on both days 5 (35 +/- 16% vs 8 +/- 11%; P less than 0.05) and day 15 (13 +/- 37% vs 4 +/- 13%; P less than 0.05). Metoprolol also reduced the incidence of ventricular fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia requiring cardioversion -6% vs 0%; P = 0.058. Metoprolol, administered in the early stages of acute myocardial infarction, had an antiarrhythmic effect which was evident only in the later phase of the study.

Eighteen patients with irritable colon syndrome were treated with a new anticholinergic drug (prifinium bromide) and with a placebo in a 6-wk, randomized, double-blind cross-over study. The drug was orally administered in a daily dose of 90 mg before meals. Three manifestations (pain, flatulence, constipation, and/or diarrhea), scored weekly, were used as assessment criteria. Mean over-all ratings showed a difference in favor of the drug, and were statistically significant. Side effects were rare and mild. We have come to the conclusion that this anticholinergic drug may be of benefit to patients with pain-predominant forms of irritable colon syndrome.

59 outpatients with irritable bowel syndrome participated in a randomised double-blind trial. The patients in the treatment group received three biscuits daily each containing 10 g of ordinary miller's bran, whereas the patients in the control group received wheat biscuits of a similar appearance. The treatment period was 6 weeks. 52% of the patients in the treatment group noted subjective improvement compared with 65% in the control group. The results of this trial do not support the routine use of miller's bran in irritable bowel syndrome.

A random sample of 120 open cases on the caseloads of two community mental health teams for elderly people, operating an open access policy, were followed up over 18 months. In comparison with referrals, caseloads had a higher proportion of patients with affective disorders and fewer with organic syndromes. Elderly patients with diagnoses of organic disorders tended to receive shorter episodes of intervention, more associated with assessment and diagnosis than continuing support, compared with those with affective disorders. A follow-up of those patients who were living at home at the point of sampling indicated that a higher proportion of those with affective disorders remained in their own homes compared with those with organic disorders.
We have assessed the results of 34 simple excisions of the trapezium, with no additional soft-tissue procedures, in 30 patients. At a median follow-up of five years (2 to 22), 16 thumbs (47%) were completely painfree and a further 10 (29%) were slightly painful after use. Nineteen thumbs (56%) had no functional disability, but thumb-pinch strength was reduced by about 20%. No patient had painful degeneration at the scaphotrapezial pseudarthrosis.
This study determined whether long-term abstinence reinforcement could maintain cocaine abstinence throughout a year long period. Patients who injected drugs and used cocaine during methadone treatment (n = 78) were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 abstinence-reinforcement groups or to a usual care control group. Participants in the 2 abstinence-reinforcement groups could earn take-home methadone doses for providing opiate- and cocaine-free urine samples; participants in 1 of those groups also could earn 5,800 US dollars in vouchers for providing cocaine-free urine samples over 52 weeks. Both abstinence-reinforcement interventions increased cocaine abstinence, but the addition of the voucher intervention resulted in the largest and most sustained abstinence. Therefore, voucher-based reinforcement of cocaine abstinence in methadone patients can be a highly effective maintenance intervention.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the benefits of intensive glucose lowering treatment were limited: a 19% increase in all-cause death and a 43% increase in cardiovascular death could not be ruled out. The benefit to risk ratio in the prevention of vascular events remained uncertain. Given the limitations of the included studies and the analysis undertaken, the authors' cautious conclusions seem appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that cognitive impairments following ECT appeared mostly to be limited to the three days after treatment and that subsequently most functions improved beyond baseline levels. Evidence was lacking about several cognitive domains. Although the review was generally well conducted, some caution is advisable in interpreting the conclusions due to a failure to assess study validity.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed whether periodontal disease treatment with scaling and root planing during pregnancy was effective in reducing preterm birth rate. The authors concluded that treatment had no significant effect on incidence of preterm birth, low birthweight infants, spontaneous abortions/stillbirths and overall adverse pregnancy outcomes. This was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusion is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that the available data on the role of occlusive therapy in atopic dermatitis were encouraging but limited by the lack of adequate study controls and standardised designs. Although there were some methodological problems with the review which limit its reliability, the authors' conclusions were suitably cautious and appear reasonable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effectiveness of oesophageal Doppler-monitoring guided fluid administration in patients who underwent colorectal surgery. The authors concluded that the evidence was limited by wide variations in trial design. Potential for missing studies and the possible impact of reviewer bias may mean that this conclusion is not reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that rates of mortality, myocardial infarction and stent thrombosis were similar in patients with bare metal stents and those with drug-eluting stents. Rates of target lesion revascularisation were lower in patients with drug-eluting stents. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution given the low methodological rigour of most of the included studies and concerns about review methods.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that most paediatric and adolescent patients with well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma and pulmonary metastases did not achieve a complete response to iodine-131 therapy, but disease-specific morbidity and mortality remained low; careful dosing was required to minimise the adverse effects. Quality deficits in the review and the included studies make it uncertain whether the conclusions are supported.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that surgical Maze procedures were associated with a decrease in atrial fibrillation within 12 months of surgery without an increase in length of hospital stay, perioperative complications or mortality in patients with atrial fibrillation.The possibility of publication bias and lack of information on the quality of included trials creates some uncertainty about the robustness of the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that substantial and consistent reductions in the apnoea-hyponea index were observed following maxillomandibular advancement surgery; adverse events were reported uncommonly. Outcomes following pharyngeal surgery were less consistent; adverse events were reported more commonly. The review had some methodological problems and data limitations, so caution is warranted when interpreting the authors' conclusions. 
This study examined the influence of different levels of feedback and of other situational and buffering variables on the psychological effects of ultrasound examinations of 211 pregnant women. The patients were randomly assigned to two different experimental conditions: high feedback and low feedback. The subjects' levels of anxiety (both trait- and state-anxiety) were measured immediately before and after the ultrasound examination. Overall, there was a significant decrease in the level of state-anxiety, which could not be explained by the different levels of feedback provided. Situational and buffering variables were not found to be related to the degree of psychological benefit produced by the scan.
This study explored Emotionally Focused Therapy (EFT) for couples with childhood sexual abuse survivors (CSA) and their partners. Half of the couples in this study reported clinically significant increases in mean relationship satisfaction and clinically significant decreases in trauma symptoms, and thematic analyses identified numerous areas where trauma survivors were challenged in fully engaging in the therapy process. In particular, trauma symptoms such as affect dysregulation and hypervigilance were identified to play a role in the challenges that survivors experienced in fully engaging in the EFT process. Results of these thematic analyses yielded clinical recommendations for working with CSA survivors and their partners in EFT for traumatized couples. Recommendations for future study were articulated.
Forty-five female outpatients sexually abused in childhood were offered a 2-year phase-divided group therapy. Before and after treatment and at 12 months follow-up, they answered questionnaires designed to elicit responses concerning psychological symptoms (Symptom Checklist; SCL-90) and sense of coherence (SOC). Symptoms for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) were assessed before and after treatment. Inpatient days and sick listing days were assessed during 2 years before and 2 years after treatment. The psychological and PTSD symptoms were significantly reduced after treatment, and the SOC was increased as well. Inpatient days were decreased, and sick listing days increased but not significantly. Compared to a similar short-term focused therapy group and a waiting-list group there were no significant differences between the groups. Trauma-focused group therapy for women who were sexually abused in childhood seems to have promising effects on mental health, both concerning long-term and short-term approaches.
The authors conducted a randomized clinical trial of individual psychotherapy for women with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) related to childhood sexual abuse (n = 74), comparing cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) with a problem-solving therapy (present-centered therapy; PCT) and to a wait-list (WL). The authors hypothesized that CBT would be more effective than PCT and WL in decreasing PTSD and related symptoms. CBT participants were significantly more likely than PCT participants to no longer meet criteria for a PTSD diagnosis at follow-up assessments. CBT and PCT were superior to WL in decreasing PTSD symptoms and secondary measures. CBT had a significantly greater dropout rate than PCT and WL. Both CBT and PCT were associated with sustained symptom reduction in this sample.
The association between sexual abuse and HIV risk is well documented, yet little empirical data exists on treatment approaches integrating the psychological impact of sexual abuse and HIV disease. This study examined the clinical significance of change on sexual-trauma-related stress following a coping group intervention study among 28 women and men with HIV-AIDS and a history of childhood sexual abuse. More than 75% of participants showed improvement on 1 or more subscales of the Trauma Symptom Inventory, with the majority of improvements within domains related to trauma symptoms and behavioral difficulties. Most observed gains were modest, but are considered meaningful in the context of stressors encountered by this disenfranchised sample, which was diverse with respect to race, sexual orientation, and psychiatric comorbidity. These preliminary findings support the need for the conduct of research trials to identify mental health and secondary prevention intervention models that can assist those with HIV-AIDS who have experienced childhood sexual abuse.
OBJECTIVE: Misoprostol use in early pregnancy may incur a risk of uterine rupture in women with previous uterine surgery. STUDY DESIGN: We analyzed 488 women who received misoprostol 800 microg vaginally in a study that evaluated medical and surgical management of early pregnancy failure. Subjects received a repeat misoprostol dose if expulsion was not confirmed 2 days after treatment. We compared efficacy, acceptability, and safety in subjects with a history (n = 78 women) or absence (n = 410 women) of uterine surgery, defined as cesarean delivery or myomectomy. RESULTS: Expulsion rates after a single misoprostol dose (69% vs 72%; P = .64) and overall success at 30 days (82% vs 85%; P = .50) were comparable. Pain, bleeding, complications, and acceptability did not differ. No uterine ruptures occurred (95% CI, 0, 3.8%). CONCLUSION: Misoprostol treatment for early pregnancy failure had similar success, acceptability, and complications in women with and without previous uterine surgery.
The advent of antiretroviral therapies in 1996 prompted an interest in the role played by ancillary services in improving access to and retention in medical care, particularly since the success of the new therapies is often contingent upon ongoing and appropriate primary medical care. Using self-reported survey data from a longitudinal representative sample of 577 HIV-positive adults in New York City, this paper explores the impact of such supportive services as drug treatment, case management, housing assistance, mental health treatment and transportation on engagement with medical care. The study's principal finding was that specific ancillary services were significantly associated with an increase in an individual's likelihood of entering medical care and maintaining appropriate medical care services for HIV, particularly when the services addressed a corresponding need.
Our aim was to determine if a comprehensive adherence package improved self reported adherence to antiretroviral therapy. The adherence package included an education programme, individualized planning of regimens, and the opportunity for a patient to choose from a number of adherence aids and reminder devices. A randomized step wedge design was used. Forty-three individuals were randomized to begin the intervention over a five-month period. There was a substantial fall in the number of missed doses reported for the last four days (0.76 to 0.38, P =0.03) and last seven days (1.5 to 0.74, P =0.005) but not for the last 28 days (2.5 to 2.5, P =0.63). There was no statistical difference in the viral load or CD4 lymphocyte count in the period before or after the intervention. The Morisky score during the pre and post intervention periods was significantly different (P =0.006), 2.9 (SD 0.9) and 3.3 (SD 0.8) respectively. This adherence package improved self reported adherence during the last four and seven days.
Adherence to antiretroviral therapy is critical for treatment success. Antiretroviral therapy typically requires multiple pills at multiple dosing times. To address this, we tested the feasibility, utility, and efficacy of a customizable reminder system using pagers, which were programmed using web-based technology, to increase and maintain proper adherence in patients with pre-existing adherence problems. After a two-week monitoring period with an electronic pill-cap, participants with less than 90% adherence were randomized to continue monitoring or to receive a pager. The group who received the pagers had greater improvements in adherence from baseline to Week 2 and Week 12 than those who monitored their medications only. However, adherence in both groups at the outcome assessments points was still poor. While the provision of a reminder system helped improve adherence, it is likely that more intensive interventions are required for patients with pre-existing problems.
One hundred seventy-one patients, 60 years of age or older with isolated systolic hypertension, were randomly assigned to receive chlorthalidone 12.5, 25.0, or 50.0 mg or placebo once daily for 12 weeks. The majority of the patients receiving chlorthalidone 12.5 mg achieved therapeutic success with no clinically significant biochemical changes or side effects. The 50.0-mg dose level enhanced efficacy only minimally over the 25.0-mg dose level. Drug-related side effects were significantly more prevalent in the chlorthalidone 50.0-mg group than in the placebo group. The data suggest that most elderly patients with isolated systolic hypertension, regardless of the severity, could be treated effectively and safely with chlorthalidone 12.5 mg per day.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that supplemental calcium was effective for prevention of adenoma recurrence in patients with a history of adenomas. There was no similar effect in patients at higher and lower risks. These conclusions reflected the evidence presented, but should be interpreted cautiously in view of the limited quality of some of the included studies.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that high-dose N-acetylcysteine decreased the incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy. This was a generally well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
The use of vitamin A therapy during human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is under clinical investigation, and vitamin A could potentially modulate HIV replication because the virus genome contains a retinoic acid response element. A randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled clinical trial was conducted to determine the impact of single high-dose vitamin A supplementation, 60-mg retinol equivalent (200,000 IU), on HIV load and CD4 lymphocyte count. HIV-infected injection drug users (120) were randomly allocated to receive vitamin A or placebo. Plasma vitamin A level, CD4 lymphocyte count, and HIV load were measured at baseline and 2 and 4 weeks after treatment. Vitamin A supplementation had no significant impact on HIV load or CD4 lymphocyte count at 2 and 4 weeks after treatment. This study suggests that high-dose vitamin A supplementation does not influence HIV load.
beta-Carotene has been reported to have an immunostimulatory effect. Recent studies suggest that beta-carotene supplementation can increase CD4 counts in HIV-infected patients. Our double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was designed to test the efficacy of beta-carotene in raising CD4 counts in HIV-infected patients. Twenty-one HIV-seropositive patients were randomized to receive either beta-carotene, 180 mg/day or placebo for 4 weeks, and then crossed over to receive the alternative treatment for the following 4 weeks. beta-Carotene resulted in a statistically significant increase in total WBC count (p = 0.01), % change in CD4 count (p = 0.02), and % change in CD4/CD8 ratios (p = 0.02) compared to placebo. The absolute CD4 count, absolute CD4/CD8 ratio, and total and B-lymphocytes all increased on carotene and fell during placebo, but these differences did not reach statistical significance. No toxicity was observed on either treatment. beta-Carotene appears to have an immunostimulatory effect in HIV-infected patients. Further studies are needed to demonstrate whether beta-carotene has a role as adjunct therapy in treatment of HIV-infected patients.
Breast milk vitamin A is not well characterized as an indicator of vitamin A status in women with infections. A controlled trial of vitamin A, 3 mg retinol equivalent/day, was conducted among 697 pregnant women with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in Malawi which allowed comparison of plasma versus breast milk vitamin A as indicators of vitamin A status. Retinol concentrations were measured in plasma at baseline (18-28 weeks) and 38 weeks gestation and breast milk at 6 weeks post-partum. Plasma alpha 1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were measured at baseline. Plasma retinol (geometric mean, SD) at 38 weeks was 0.72 (0.44, 1.18) and 0.61 (0.38, 0.98) mumol/L (P < 0.0002) and breast milk retinol was 1.32 (0.71, 2.43) and 0.95 (0.49, 1.82) mumol/L (P < 0.0001) in vitamin A and placebo groups, respectively. Women with elevated acute phase protein (AGP > 1 gm/L and/or CRP > 5 mg/L) at baseline who received vitamin A had significantly higher plasma and breast milk vitamin A at follow-up compared with placebo. Elevated acute phase proteins did not distinguish women with low body stores of vitamin A. Breast milk retinol appears to be a better indicator of vitamin A status than plasma retinol in women with infections.
This study compared the effectiveness of 4 videotaped educational programs designed to motivate HIV testing among low-income, ethnic minority women. Four hundred eighty women were assigned randomly to watch one of 2 gain-framed or 2 loss-framed videos. Consistent with prospect theory, participants' perceptions of the certainty of the outcome of an HIV test moderated the effects of framing on self-reported testing behavior 6 months after video exposure. Among participants who reported being certain of the test's outcome, those who saw a gain-framed video reported a higher rate of testing than those who saw a loss-framed message. Among women who perceived the outcome of HIV testing as relatively uncertain, gain- and loss-framed videos led to similar rates of self-reported testing, with some advantage for the loss-framed message.
Between 1 March 1985 and 28 February 1987, 1659 patients attending Glasgow Genito-Urinary Medicine (GUM) Clinics were tested for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Forty (2.4%) were positive. Thirty-seven of these were homosexual (36/37) or bisexual (1/37) males. The overall prevalence of antibodies to HIV in this group was 3.9% (37/940) and showed no significant increase over the two year period. Following the extensive media campaign in October 1986, the total numbers tested each month rose from an average of around 50, to 144 in December 1986. There was a further rise to 220 in March 1987 coinciding with AIDS week in March 1987. Since then the numbers have again declined. Before the October campaign, 70% of these tested (692/990) were homo/bisexual males. After the campaign the number of heterosexual males and females rose sharply, accounting for 68% of these tested.
Megestrol acetate and corticosteroid have been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of anorexia in patients with advanced cancer. The purpose of this preliminary study is to evaluate the role of megestrol acetate and prednisolone in the treatment of anorexia induced during whole pelvis external irradiation. Fifty-two patients were randomized in this prospective study to either receive megestrol acetate (40 mg orally four times a day), prednisolone (10 mg orally three times a day), or placebo (1 tablet orally three times a day) for 21 consecutive days. Body weight, appetite, performance status, sense of well-being, and complications were assessed every 3 days. Both the megestrol acetate group and the prednisolone group showed improvement in body weight gain, appetite, performance status, and sense of well-being. Appetite improvement was statistically significant in the megestrol acetate group (P = 0.024) when compared with the placebo group. There were no complications during the 21-day trial.
PURPOSE: Several placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that megestrol acetate can result in appetite stimulation and nonfluid weight gain in patients with cancer anorexia/cachexia. The present trial was designed to compare megestrol acetate doses ranging from 160 to 1,280 mg/d. METHODS: This trial randomized 342 assessable patients with cancer anorexia/cachexia to receive oral megestrol acetate at doses of 160, 480, 800, or 1,280 mg/d. Patients were evaluated monthly by history, examination, patient-completed questionnaires, and serum albumin levels. RESULTS: The data demonstrate that there is a positive dose-response effect for megestrol acetate on appetite stimulation (P < or = .02). In concert, there was a trend for more nonfluid weight gain with higher drug doses. Megestrol acetate was well tolerated in this group of patients with advanced malignant disease. CONCLUSION: The positive dose-response effect that we observed for megestrol acetate on appetite stimulation supports both our prestudy hypothesis and other available literature. Nonetheless, based primarily on the cost and inconvenience associated with the use of higher doses of this drug, it is reasonable to use 160 mg/d for the initial treatment of cancer anorexia/cachexia in routine clinical practice.
To assess the effect of megestrol acetate (MA) on the appetite and weight of cancer patients with nonhormone-dependent tumors, a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was designed. One hundred fifty patients were included: 76 were given MA (240 mg/day orally) for at least 2 months, and 74 were given placebo (P). Body weight, subjective sense of appetite (SSA) evaluated by an analogic linear visual scale scored from 1 to 10, and performance status (PS) were measured before therapy and monthly thereafter. No differences in body weight before and after treatment could be found in any group. However, 32% of the patients in the MA group (95% confidence interval: 20.1-44.6%) gained 2 or more kilograms (P less than 0.001). This group also showed an improvement in SSA (P less than 0.01): an increase greater than or equal to 2 points appeared in 57.5% of patients (95% confidence interval 44.6-69.4%). There was no significant difference in PS for the treatment groups before or after therapy. The percentage of reported adverse events did not differ significantly from one treatment group to the next. We conclude that therapy with MA at a dose of 240 mg/day improved SSA and was associated with moderate weight gain in patients with hormone-insensitive malignancies.
High-dose megestrol acetate has been associated with increased appetite and weight. To examine the effects of high-dose megestrol acetate in the treatment of anorexia and weight loss in patients with advanced hormone-insensitive malignant lesions, a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial was conducted. Patients receiving megestrol acetate for 1 month reported a significant improvement in appetite and adequacy of food intake compared with those receiving placebo. A three-item scale measuring appetite, adequacy of food intake, and concern about weight revealed a higher improvement with megestrol acetate than with placebo. Patients who worsened while receiving placebo had similar favorable changes after the cross over to megestrol acetate. These data indicate that megestrol acetate may improve appetite and food intake in patients with advanced cancer.
Young marijuana abusers rarely seek treatment themselves and are difficult to engage in treatment when referred by social agencies. To evaluate treatment engagement strategies in this population, 65 young probation-referred marijuana abusers were randomly assigned to either three-session motivational enhancement therapy (MET alone) or three-session MET plus contingency management (MET/CM), with vouchers for treatment attendance. A significantly higher number of participants in the MET/CM condition completed the three-session intervention as compared with MET alone. Participants in both conditions reported significant reductions in marijuana use and improvement in legal problems. These findings suggest that young marijuana abusers benefit from scientifically validated treatments.
A placebo-controlled, randomized trial assessed the activity, tolerance, and degree of weight gain and anorexia of two doses of megestrol acetate in patients with advanced cancer and cachexia. Patients received either low-dose (480 mg/day) or high-dose (960 mg/day) megestrol acetate or placebo for 8 weeks. As of March 1991, 91 patients had been randomized; 65 patients were evaluable. Median initial weight loss in all patients ranged from 13 to 16%. Further weight loss was seen in 13 of 17 patients in the placebo group, compared with 10 of 27 and 6 of 21 in the low- and high-dose megestrol acetate groups, respectively. Eight of 27 patients in the low-dose-group and 9 of 21 in the high-dose group gained weight, with a median of 3 and 4 kg, respectively. Beneficial effects of megestrol acetate were seen in 63 and 71% of the low- and high-dose groups, respectively, compared with 24% of the placebo group. Side effects of megestrol acetate were mild. No correlation between megestrol acetate dosage and weight gain was found, but there was a tendency for increased weight in more patients taking high-dose megestrol acetate.
Megestrol acetate, a semisynthetic gestagen, is effective not only for endocrine therapy of advanced breast carcinomas, but also in the treatment of cachectic patients with aggressive, hormone-independent tumors. Sixty-six patients with therapy-resistant, advanced bronchogenic carcinomas of different histologic types, who had lost more than 10% of their regular body weight within a prospective, randomized trial, were treated with megestrol acetate at a dose of either 160 or 480 mg/day for 3-4 months. The mean weight gain for all patients was 2.5 kg. Nearly all of them (80%) reported improved appetite and well-being. The mean weight gain in the group of patients receiving 480 mg/day was higher (3.0 kg) than in the group receiving 160 mg/day (2.0 kg).
The authors conducted a randomized controlled trial to assess the impact of a 15-week (20 minutes three times per week) home-based aerobic exercise intervention versus usual care on the physical endurance, immune status, and self-reported health status of 99 HIV-infected adults. In the exercise group, there was no improvement in physical endurance or health-related quality of life (HRQOL), except in the Medical Outcomes Study-HIV Health Survey Overall Health subscale (difference = 12.1, 95% confidence interval = 2.0-22.2, p = .02). Although physical endurance levels were maintained at baseline levels in the intervention group and declined in the control group, differences between the groups were small and not significant. There were also no significant changes in CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts. Exercise appears to be safe in HIV-infected patients. Improvements in physical endurance and HRQOL might result if the exercise protocol is longer or progressive. Further research is needed to establish guidelines for exercise in patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy.
PURPOSE: Thirty four HIV+ patients participated in a 6-wk aerobic exercise training program to determine whether exercise improved aerobic fitness, immune indices, and quality of life. METHODS: Subjects were assigned to three groups: control (no regular aerobic exercise), moderate exercise, and heavy exercise training. At study entry and exit (in each subject) we evaluated aerobic function with a symptom limited cardiopulmonary exercise test, immune indices with CD4 counts and Candida skin tests, viral replication with plasma HIV RNA measurements, and quality of life with a HIV+ population validated questionnaire. RESULTS: Aerobic fitness increased significantly in both exercise groups relative to the control group; immune indices changed very little among all three groups; however, the Candida skin tests (mm2) increased significantly in the moderate group; viral replication was essentially unchanged in all three groups; quality of life (QOL) markers improved in both exercising groups but not the control group. There were no opportunistic infections during the study. CONCLUSIONS: Exercise training resulted in a substantial improvement in aerobic function while immune indices were essentially unchanged. Quality of life markers improved significantly with exercise. Exercise training is safe and effective in this patient group and should be promoted for HIV+ patients.
The efficacy of benzydamine hydrochloride (Difflam) spray to relieve pain from postoperative tonsillectomy was assessed, but it was found that it did not relieve the symptoms after operation when compared to matching placebo.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether loop diathermy excision of the transformation zone and laser vaporisation are equally effective in the treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial. POPULATION: Women referred for evaluation of cytological abnormality who were considered suitable for outpatient local destructive treatment. SETTING: Seven colposcopy units in the North West Region. METHODS: Loop diathermy excision of the transformation zone and laser vaporisation. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Smear reported as moderate dyskariosis or worse following treatment. RESULTS: Of 289 women randomised, 285 had one or more smears following treatment. Women were more likely to have a smear reported as moderate dyskariosis or worse following laser vaporisation [hazard ratio 3.01 (95% CI 1.27 to 7.12)]. The cumulative risk of a smear reported as moderate dyskariosis or worse was 6.0% at six months and 12.1% at three years in those allocated laser vaporisation, and 2.0% at six months, and 3.3% at three years in those allocated loop diathermy excision of the transformation zone. CONCLUSIONS: Loop diathermy excision is a more effective treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia than laser vaporisation.
AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Our aim was to investigate whether loop excision is an acceptable alternative to traditional cold knife conization of the cervix. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 240 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) were randomly assigned to loop excision (n = 120) or cold knife conization (n = 120). Success and complication rates of both methods were analysed. RESULTS: 100% of cold knife conization and 98% of loop excision surgical specimens were positive for dysplasia. The rate of complete resection was 91% in the cold knife and 82% in the loop excision group, but histologic confirmation of residual CIN was obtained in only 2 (1.7%) women after cold knife conization and in 5 (4.2%) after loop excision. Loop excision cones were significantly shallower than those obtained by a cold knife. Secondary surgical procedures due to early hemorrhage were performed in 9 (7.5%) patients treated with cold knife conization and in 8 (6.7%) treated with loop excision. Elevated temperature postoperatively was observed in 16.4% of patients after cold knife conization and in 13.9% after loop excision. There were no other postoperative complications. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that cold knife conization and loop excision are comparable and equally effective diagnostic and therapeutic procedures for CIN.
Outcomes of an integrated inpatient treatment program for persons with serious mental illness and substance use disorders are examined in relationship to five stages of treatment--stabilization, engagement, persuasion/awareness, active treatment, and relapse prevention. The study used a randomized design with participants assigned to an integrated mental health and substance abuse treatment program or standard psychiatric hospital treatment. At discharge, participants in the integrated treatment program indicated more active engagement in treatment and greater awareness of mental health issues, substance use issues, and the 12-step program than those who received standard hospital treatment. Participants in the integrated treatment program also saw their treatment as being more effective and had more motivation to stay healthy and sober. The integrated treatment program was not equally effective at each treatment stage with all participants. The implications of the program's success overall and at each treatment stage are discussed.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that laparoscopic appendectomy was associated with significant benefits compared with open appendectomy in patients with acute appendicitis and that it was a safe and effective treatment alternative to open appendectomy. However, the unexplained variation across the results of the trials means that the reliability of the authors' conclusions is unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that protamine administration after percutaneous coronary intervention appeared to be safe and was associated with a significant reduction in major bleeding complications. Uncertainty with regard to the selection and quality of included studies means that even this tentative conclusion proposed by the authors might not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that case management, integrated care and consumer-directed care differed according to the model's focus and that a combination of all three care models may maximise outcomes for older people. The authors' conclusions were appropriately cautious, but the reliability of the results is uncertain because of potential for bias in identifying studies and substantial study variability.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was no evidence to suggest that endoscopic band ligation (EBL) plus sclerotherapy is more effective than EBL alone in the secondary prevention of oesophageal variceal hemorrhage. Given that the findings were based on a small number of trials of poor quality, the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with some caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that financial incentives may have improved treatment adherence in severely mentally ill populations, but very few studies were focused on psychiatric treatment. Limitations in the evidence base, which included uncertain study quality and a lack of reported review processes, make the reliability of the conclusions uncertain
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that arthroplasty reduced reoperation and complication rates with no difference in mortality compared with internal fixation in the treatment of displaced femoral neck fracture in the elderly. The evidence supported the authors' findings, but methodological shortcomings of the data and variability between trials mean that the conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that among patients without gallstones, but with right upper quadrant pain and a positive hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scan, cholecystectomy was more likely to relieve symptoms than medical treatment. In view of probable selection bias, poor reporting of study characteristics, clinical differences between studies and high levels of statistical heterogeneity, the conclusions may not be reliable.
The primary objective of this study was to evaluate in a random double-blind design, the sedative and behavioural responses of children undergoing outpatient paediatric dental procedures receiving either chloral hydrate (CH) alone or in combination with hydroxyzine. Forty American Society of Anaesthesiologists class I children (21 to 36 months of age) were randomly allocated to receive either 70 mg/kg CH alone or with 2 mg/kg hydroxyzine. The degree of crying, movement and overall behaviour was evaluated during treatment at different times. The combination of chloral hydrate/hydroxyzine (CH/H) significantly decreased crying and movement in relation to the effect induced by CH alone (p < 0.05) only at 45-60 min following the insertion of a rubber dam, whereas the overall behavior in both groups was no different throughout the dental procedures. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that hydroxyzine increased the effect of CH. However, because of the presence of high rates of oxygen desaturations and of deep sedation, careful use of this drug combination should be stressed.

A double-blind study was undertaken to determine the efficacy of an oral dose of midazolam 7.5 mg as compared to placebo in a sample of 32 children who had refused dental care after the conventional psychological approach alone was used to reduce fear and apprehensive behavior. Parameters assessed before and 30 minutes after the oral administration of either midazolam or placebo were mental attitude, hypnotic activity, motor activity, quality of sedation and of dental treatment. A three-point scale was designed in each studied parameter and mean values +/- s.e.m. were compared before and after treatment by using Wilcoxon's rank test. It was shown that an oral dose of midazolam 7.5 mg significantly improved all parameters under evaluation (p < 0.01) as compared to placebo, effects which appeared thirty minutes after administration. It is concluded that oral midazolam provides a fast and adequate sedation in children refusing dental care. Thus, the drug is an alternative to other sedative or hypnotic drugs currently used in the premedication of the apprehensive child.

BACKGROUND: In most cases of miscarriage, standard procedure has until recently been surgical revision of the uterine cavity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 94 women with first trimester miscarriage were randomized to surgical revision (n = 48) or expectation (n = 46) after informed consent. Women with unacceptable pain or bleeding, or uterine contents of more than 20 mm diameter on sonography were not included. The patients were followed up seven to ten days later with gynaecological examination, sonography, and determination of levels of haemoglobin, leukocytes, C-reactive protein and HCG.
RESULTS: In the revision group there were no operative complications, no cases of infection, and no unscheduled consultations. Mean duration of bleeding was 4.8 days (range 1-11 days). In the observation group there were no cases of infection, surgical revision was carried out in seven patients, and there were six unscheduled consultations. Mean duration of bleeding was 7.3 days (range 2-27 days). The women undergoing surgical revision had less pain and bleeding.
INTERPRETATION: Women with first trimester miscarriage may safely be observed without surgical revision but may have somewhat more pain and more vaginal bleeding than if revision is carried out.

We report a randomised double blind trial of myo-inositol (inositol) supplementation for 10 days in 74 preterm infants with a birth weight less than 2000 g (mean gestational age 29.5 weeks and mean birth weight 1266 g). All infants required artificial ventilation for treatment of respiratory distress syndrome. Inositol (120-160 mg/kg/day) was administered by the ingastric or intravenous route. The 37 infants who received inositol supplementation required less mechanical ventilation during days 4-10, had less failures of indomethacin to close ductus arteriosus, and had less deaths or bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or both, than the infants treated with placebo. There were no detectable adverse effects. These preliminary results suggest that inositol is an important nutrient in immature preterm infants.

Ancrod has been used in Europe for over 15 years for peripheral vascular disease, deep vein thrombosis, and central retinal venous thrombosis, and in patients at risk for thromboembolism. In a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study at University Hospitals in Cincinnati, 20 acute cerebral infarction patients received a series of IV infusions of ancrod (ten) or placebo (ten) for seven days. Early fibrinolysis with a small decrease in fibrinogen was observed, and d-dimers were elevated at four hours, indicating early clot lysis. At three months, patients with moderate to severe strokes (less than 40 on the Scandinavian Stroke Scale) in the ancrod group showed average improvement by a factor of 3 over the placebo group. No bleeding, abnormal laboratory results, or deaths occurred, but ancrod was discontinued in one patient who had seizures. As a result of this study, a double-blind multicenter international clinical trial to further assess the safety and effectiveness of ancrod is being planned.

Between 1 July 1984 and 30 June 1986 all children treated for acute hematologic malignancy at our center were randomized to receive continuous (group A) or intermittent (3 days/week, group B) prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (5-25 mg/kg/day/p.o.) against interstitial pneumonia with the aim of investigating if an intermittent regimen is as effective as and less toxic than a continuous regimen. The number of severe infections (group A, 17; group B, 21) and side-effects (group A, 30; group B, 34) was similar in the two groups, and compliance was also similar. We conclude therefore that neither regimen offers advantages over the other and the decision which to use should be based on cost (where regimen B has the advantage) and the children's and parents' preferences and compliance.

We describe a rapid method for the estimation of adenosine deaminase (ADA) activity in cerebrospinal, pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial fluids. Tuberculous effusions show significantly higher levels of ADA activity compared with effusions due to other underlying lesions such as neoplasms, bacterial and viral infections and simple transudates. Similarly, tuberculous meningitis results in raised ADA activity in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) when compared with the CSF from patients with other neurological disorders and from normal subjects. The results in 359 cases studied indicated the value of ADA assays in the diagnosis of tuberculous diseases. Levels above 30 IU/I in effusions and above 6 IU/I in the CSF indicate probable tuberculosis.

Adenosine deaminase (ADA) estimations were performed on the pleural fluid from 368 effusions. The mean (+/-SD) ADA concentration in tuberculous effusions was 92,11 +/- 37,05 U/l, and these values were found to be highly statistically different from the 23,23 +/- 13,15 U/l in secondary malignant tumours of the pleura, the 34,86 +/- 14,2 U/l in mesotheliomas, and the 23,81 +/- 15,07 U/l in pulmonary embolism. The ADA values of 64,3 +/- 44,95 U/l in lymphoproliferative disorders were less significantly different. No statistical difference could be found between values in the tuberculous group and the ADA levels of 97,57 +/- 82 U/l found in para-infective effusions, but these could be distinguished from each other by microscopic examination of the pleural fluid. The importance of ADA estimations in the diagnosis and differentiation of tuberculous effusions is discussed and the role of microscopy is emphasized.

The activity of adenosine deaminase (ADA) was determined in serum and pleural fluid of 90 patients with pleural effusions of various aetiology. Tuberculous pleural effusions, empyemas and rheumatoid pleural effusions demonstrated significantly higher activities of ADA than parapneumonic , nonspecific and malignant pleural effusions and effusions in systemic lupus erythematosus and congestive heart failure. In tuberculosis, empyema and rheumatoid arthritis ADA activity was significantly higher in pleural fluid than in serum, indicating a local synthesis of ADA by cells within the pleural cavity in these diseases.

We have studied the ability of clonidine to potentiate morphine analgesia in 28 patients (ASA I) after meniscectomy under general anaesthesia. One hour after surgery, morphine 3 mg (n = 10), clonidine 75 micrograms (n = 8) or morphine 3 mg plus clonidine 75 micrograms (n = 10) was injected extradurally. Morphine alone and in combination with clonidine produced similar and significant analgesia as assessed by verbal analogue pain scores. Pain scores did not decrease significantly in patients given clonidine alone. There were statistically, but not clinically significant decreases in systemic arterial pressure after morphine alone and clonidine alone. No patient developed sensory or motor block. One patient given morphine alone developed retention of urine. It is concluded that, in the dose used in this study, clonidine did not potentiate the analgesia produced by extradural morphine.

Chronic central pain is a frequent complication after spinal cord injury. Anticonvulsant drugs, among them valproate, have been recommended for treatment. In this paper we conducted a double-blind, cross-over study comparing valproate and placebo for severe chronic central pain. During the study, serum concentration of valproate, pain and side effects were registered and the dose was adjusted according to these. No significant analgesic effects of valproate could be demonstrated although serum concentration and dose reached a high level. Few studies of pain following spinal cord injury exist and we recommend that further studies be performed.

In many cases, the treatment of neuropathic pain by intrathecal opioids fails to meet expectations. In a trial involving 10 patients, the intrathecal administration of clonidine combined with opioids in the treatment of chronic pain was introduced in our department for the first time. Eight patients with neuropathic pain syndromes were subjected to a continuous intrathecal clonidine application in addition to intrathecal morphine. At an average dose of 44 microg clonidine/day, a 70-100% reduction in pain was achieved. Residual non-neuropathic pain in 4 of 8 patients was successfully treated with clonidine and low doses of opioids. On the basis of the results achieved so far, we recommend that clonidine should be routinely tested for intrathecal drug administration, especially in patients with a prominent neuropathic pain component.

We evaluated the efficacy of clonidine given orally preoperatively for preventing postoperative vomiting (POV) in children undergoing propofol-nitrous oxide anaesthesia for strabismus surgery. Sixty children, ASA physical status I, aged 2-12 years, received diazepam, 0.4 mg x kg(-1) or clonidine, 4 microg x kg(-1) (n=30 each) orally, in a randomized double-blind manner. These drugs were given 105 min before an inhalational induction of anaesthesia. A complete response, defined as no POV and no need for rescue antiemetic medication, during 0-24 h after anaesthesia was 67% with diazepam and 93% with clonidine, respectively (P=0.024). No clinically adverse event was observed in any of the groups. In summary, pretreatment with oral clonidine enhances the antiemetic efficacy of propofol for the prevention of POV after paediatric strabismus surgery.

The purpose of this paper is to examine the effects of alcohol regulation on physical child abuse. Given the positive relationship between alcohol consumption and violence, and the negative relationship between consumption and price, the principal hypothesis to be tested is that an increase in the price of alcohol will lead to a reduction in the incidence of violence. We also examine the effects of illegal drug prices and alcohol availability on the incidence of child abuse. Equations are estimated separately for mothers and fathers, and include state fixed effects. Results indicate that increases in the beer tax may decrease the incidence of violence committed by females but not by males.

The effect of 3 ml.kg-1 of apple juice given 2.6 +/- 0.4 hours preoperatively was investigated in 80 healthy children of ages five to ten years in this prospective, randomized, single blind study. The children who drank apple juice preoperatively had decreased gastric volume, thirst, and hunger (p less than 0.05). The gastric volume in the control group was 0.43 +/- 0.46 ml.kg-1 and in the patients who received apple juice the gastric volume was 0.24 +/- 0.31 ml.kg-1. The gastric pH was not significantly different, with the control group's gastric pH being 1.7 +/- 0.6 and the treated group's pH was 2.2 +/- 1.2. Further studies of the effects of different volumes and timing of preoperative clear fluids are indicated in paediatric patients.

The purpose of this randomized double blind prospective trial was to study the efficacy and safety of two doses of oral gestrinone in the treatment of endometriosis. Six patients received gestrinone 1.25 mg twice weekly (group I) and six patients received gestrinone 2.5 mg twice weekly (group II). Patients underwent pretreatment and post-treatment laparoscopies and their endometriosis scores were recorded. The mean total endometriosis scores declined significantly from 20.0 +/- 5.2 (mean +/- standard error of the mean) pretreatment to 9.5 +/- 3.9 post-treatment in group I and from 19.1 +/- 4.8 pretreatment to 7.1 +/- 2.1 post-treatment in group II. A total of 67% of patients reported side effects. This study suggests that oral gestrinone 1.25 mg or 2.5 mg twice weekly is efficacious and safe in the treatment of endometriosis.

PURPOSE: To test the hypothesis that recent onset psychotic patients who use cannabis will have psychotic symptoms that are more severe and more persistent than those who do not use cannabis.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We carried out a 4-year follow-up study of a cohort of 119 patients with recent onset of psychosis. The patients were divided into four groups according to duration of cannabis use, taking index admission and follow-up as reference points.
RESULTS: Those subjects who persisted in the use of cannabis had more positive (but not negative) symptoms and a more continuous illness at follow-up.
LIMITATIONS: The main limitations of the study were: the relatively small sample size, and that the excess of male subjects and the presence of cannabis induced psychosis could have a confusing impact on the interpretation of the results.
CONCLUSION: It is possible that psychotic patients who use cannabis are at a greater risk of a more continuous illness with more positive symptoms than those who do not.

This short monograph describes the rationale, design and outcome of a pilot study of beta interferon in patients with primary progressive MS. A total of 50 patients were studied for 2 years using a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled design. There was an emphasis on using MRI measures to evaluate outcome. The study showed that with the numbers studied, useful data could be obtained on safety and on efficacy on certain MRI measures. A larger study would be required to evaluate treatment on disability in this patient cohort and further work is needed to elucidate the relationship between quantitative MR and clinical measures over the longer term.

Ambulatory computerized physician order entry (ACPOE) represents one strategy to improve physician ordering practices, compliance with guidelines, and patient safety. We surveyed primary care physicians (PCPs) regarding attitudes towards ACPOE and its various features. Most PCPs did not have systems for tracking test results and were concerned about missed tests. However, there was concern that ACPOE might be time consuming, and only one-third of PCPs felt that ACPOE features would be very useful. Speed and workflow issues will be important contributors to the success of ACPOE. In addition, physician buy-in to the utility of its various features will need to be strengthened.

The use of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) has been widely advocated to transform health-care delivery by improving quality, safety, and efficiency. Compared to a paper-based system, EHRs offer better access to clinical data and facilitate order entry and decision support. However, the benefits provided by EHRs do not eliminate the need to assess how such systems alter clinician time utilization. A major barrier to EHR use has been the concern that the EHR will take longer to use than paper-based systems. Few studies have addressed this issue in specialty clinic settings. We performed a time-motion study to evaluate how oncologists' time utilization differed before and after EHR implementation.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there is limited evidence that conventional treatment combined with supervised rehabilitation training may be superior to conventional treatment alone for acute lateral ankle sprain. The authors' conclusion seems reasonable given the small number and poor quality of the studies identified.
CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated whether the timing of the removal of indwelling urethral catheters (IUCs) influences patient outcomes. The authors concluded that the limited available evidence suggested benefit, in terms of patient outcomes and a reduction in the length of hospitalisation, following the midnight removal of IUCs. The conclusion pertaining to the length of hospitalisation is reliable, but the generalised advantage of midnight removal of IUCs for patient outcomes is less clear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared exercise and pharmacological stress myocardial perfusion imaging for risk stratification in known or suspected coronary disease. There were weaknesses in the review process and reporting of results. The conclusion that both tests have comparable risk stratification ability appears robust, but the greater risk of cardiac events for pharmacological stress test patients is not supported by the data presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This meta-analysis of 10 trials found that chemoradiotherapy had a small beneficial effect on death rate in people with inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer, but increased severe acute toxicity compared with radiotherapy alone. The results were not different for daily or weekly chemoradiotherapy. However, these general findings should be treated with caution because the primary studies differed in terms of tumour stage and treatment regimens.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab when added to methotrexate in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. The authors concluded that the three agents have similar efficacy when combined with methotrexate. Overall, the methods of analysis may mean that the trials were not powered to detect any true treatment effect differences. Head-to-head comparisons between the three drugs are therefore warranted.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the adverse effects of pramipexole and ropinirole with levodopa and placebo in the treatment of Parkinson's disease. The authors concluded that, compared with placebo, ropinirole appears to increase rates of hypotension and somnolence more than pramipexole, while pramipexole increases hallucinations more than ropinirole. These drugs were not compared directly, thus the authors' conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: A meta-analysis to determine the benefits of specialist nurse-led heart failure (HF) interventions in comparison with usual care found that hospital usage and HF readmissions were lower in patients offered interventions that included discharge planning, but there was no effect on all-cause mortality and quality of life. The authors' conclusions appear optimistic given the evidence presented. There were several limitations in the review methodology which render the results potentially unreliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed factors that influence complications after intracapsular hip fractures in young adults. The authors concluded that early or open fracture reduction may not reduce the risk of nonunion or avascular necrosis, and suggested that a higher incidence of nonunion follows open reduction. The conclusions were based on case-series studies; randomised controlled trials are needed to make more definitive conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to determine the diagnostic accuracy of computed tomographic angiography (CTA), compared with intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography or surgical findings, for the detection of cerebral aneurysms after adjusting for size distributions. The author concluded that CTA is useful in the descriptive imaging of a known aneurysm. Although the author's conclusions appear consistent with the results obtained, methodological limitations may restrict interpretation.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy and risks of three therapeutic options for acoustic neurinomas. It demonstrated that with conservative management and radiologic follow-up the majority of acoustic neurinomas are slow growing but eventually require intervention. Gamma-knife radiosurgery and microsurgery provide tumour control. The analysis was simplistic, and the authors' conclusions about the superior efficacy of microsurgery needs to be interpreted with caution.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to assess the effectiveness of conservative treatments in children with tension-type headaches (TTH).
METHOD: We searched Medline, Embase and the Cochrane Library and performed reference checking. Two independent authors assessed trial quality and extracted data. Analysis was carried out according to type of intervention.
RESULTS: In total we included 11 trials (427 TTH patients, age between 7-18 years) in this review. None of the studies were considered to be of high quality. Eight studies evaluated the effectiveness of relaxation training. Four studies included a waiting list or no treatment control group and in one study a placebo was used.
CONCLUSION: We found conflicting evidence about the effectiveness of relaxation therapy when compared with no treatment or other treatments, with Relative Risks varying from 1.4 (0.6-3.2) to 10.6 (1.6-71.3). With regard to all other interventions evaluated (such as biofeedback, cognitive therapy or flupirtin) no evidence is found for or against their effectiveness.

CRD SUMMARY: This review compared consolidation therapy with autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) and non-myeloablative chemotherapy for adults with acute myeloid leukaemia in first remission. The authors concluded that there is no evidence to support the use of ABMT in these people. This conclusion seems reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed sphenopalatine artery ligation (SAL) and compared it with other techniques for the treatment of nosebleeds. The authors concluded that endoscopic transnasal SAL may be the best surgical treatment for posterior epistaxis. Treatments were not compared directly and evidence for comparison treatments was not selected systematically, hence the conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared laser coagulation, amnioreduction, septostomy and foeticide for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. The authors concluded that laser coagulation appeared to reduce perinatal mortality and morbidity more than serial amnioreduction, but there were insufficient data to evaluate septostomy and selective foeticide. The authors' cautious conclusions appear to accurately reflect the evidence, which was from predominantly non-randomised observational studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed whether educational interventions for general practitioners affect health outcomes in people with asthma. The authors concluded that there is little evidence for the effectiveness of these interventions. The review was generally well conducted and the authors' conclusions are fair.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined the effect of revascularisation on blood pressure and serum creatinine levels in patients with atherosclerotic renovascular disease. The authors concluded that the results of the meta-analysis exclude the possibility of a large improvement after angioplasty, but a moderate clinical benefit cannot be ruled out. The authors' conclusions are based on a small number of participants, and the methods used in the review may be biased.
CRD SUMMARY: This review set out to evaluate continuous passive motion (CPM) after total knee arthroplasty in terms of range of motion. The authors concluded that there was moderate, conflicting evidence of a positive, short-term effect of adding CPM to standardised physiotherapy, but no long-term effects. The conclusion appears appropriate, but potential selection bias and the omission of data may weaken this conclusion.
CRD SUMMARY: This review of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) to treat sleepiness in adults with obstructive sleep apnoea was limited by the diverse nature of the available trials. The review findings indicate that CPAP appears effective in patients with severe sleep apnoea and significant sleepiness, but data are less reliable for less severely affected patients; in these patients CPAP is probably not effective.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effectiveness of treatments for acute bleeding in patients with haemophilia A with inhibitors. The authors concluded that bleeding control varied from 60 to 100%. The authors undertook a systematic search but the lack of detail on review methodology and the poor quality of many included studies make the reliability of the conclusions uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review of interventions based on a team approach concluded that such interventions appear to be useful since there is little evidence to show that they are ineffective. The search was limited, review methods were not described and little information was given on the participants. Despite these methodological limitations, the authors' conclusions appear suitably conservative.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed counselling in US clinical settings and concluded that there were too few good quality studies to assess the effect of counselling on unintended pregnancies. The review had methodological limitations but the search was broad and only four poor-quality studies were found, which suggests that the main conclusion is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated health-related quality of life (HRQL) outcomes in children following liver transplantation. The authors tentatively concluded that there were negative influences on some aspects of HRQL in comparison with a healthy population. The tentative conclusions are appropriate given the limited evidence, and the authors' recommendations for future research appear to be well justified.
CRD SUMMARY: This review determined overall CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses to canarypox vector-based human immunodeficiency virus vaccines. The authors concluded that further studies are required to identify the dose or immunisation schedule to maximise CTL response. Insufficient details of the review methods and the restriction to English language publications make it difficult to comment on the strength of the evidence underpinning the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of nebulisers, pressurised metered-dose inhalers and dry powder inhalers as delivery systems for beta-agonists, anticholinergic agents and corticosteroids. The authors concluded that the delivery devices can be equally effective. Given the risk of studies being underpowered and the limited consideration of quality, the robustness of the authors' conclusions is somewhat unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that giving beta-blocker therapy to people with chronic heart failure was effective for both the elderly and the non-elderly. The review was reported very briefly and there was little detail on the review methods used. However, the data presented appear to support the authors' conclusion.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed whether antibiotics given before hospital admission reduce mortality from meningitis. The authors concluded that the available studies cannot answer the question because there are likely to be systematic differences in disease severity between treated and untreated groups. The conclusion that the true effect of treatment is uncertain reflects the limitations of the evidence and appears reliable.
Sickle cell anemia was detected antenatally by restriction analysis with the enzyme Dde I, which cleaves normal human DNA at the position corresponding to aminoacid number 6 of the beta-globin chain. This site is abolished by the mutation in sickle cell disease, and hence different-sized fragments are generated on digestion of normal and sickle genes with this enzyme. In a pregnancy at risk for sickle cell anaemia, digestion of DNA from cultured amniotic fluid cells revealed a pattern indicating the haemoglobin AA genotype. The diagnosis was later confirmed by fetal blood analysis. The test proved applicable to the sickle gene from Africa, Asia, The Middle East, and two Mediterranean countries.

The use of comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) in cancer patients older than 70 is recommended. Three pre-screening instruments have been proposed: the abbreviated comprehensive geriatric assessment (aCGA), the Vulnerable Elders Survey (VES-13), and the Groningen frailty index (GFI). The objective of the study was to identify the most efficient pre-screening tool that accurately determines individuals who may benefit from the entire CGA. A total of 113 elderly cancer patients were assessed by means of the aCGA, VES-13, GFI and the full CGA. The sensitivity, specificity of the three instruments was calculated, using the results from the entire CGA as the gold standard for the GFI and the VES-13. The aCGA was assessed whether each sub-component reliably predicts impairment on each sub-component of the full CGA. The majority of the participants were defined as being at risk of vulnerability: 68.14% had two or more impairments of the CGA or were cognitively impaired. The physical and disability questions are useful, but all other screening instruments miss too many cases.

The quality assurance process at Scott and White Hospital, Temple, Texas, identified a marked variation in total parenteral nutrition (TPN) prescriptions compared with recommendations by the Nutrition Support Service (NSS). A TPN order form with additive guidelines was designed to assist physicians in ordering TPN specific to patient needs. The effect of the change was assessed by comparing 50 TPN patients using the old form (1990) with 50 patients for whom the new form (1992) was used. The groups demonstrated no difference in demographics, mortality, length of stay, or biochemical parameters and were reflective of all TPN patients treated (1990, n = 280; 1992, n = 392). A significant decrease was noted in overfeeding of kilocalories when resident orders were compared with NSS recommendations (125% +/- 24% versus 110% +/- 29%, p = .017; and amino acids (120% +/- 32% versus 105% +/- 29%, p = .071, mean +/- SD). This resulted in a decrease of 8% in the cost of delivering a patient-day of TPN. We conclude that changing the TPN order form to a teaching vehicle results in decreased overfeeding and costs.

This exploratory study examined the effect of structured teaching about essential hypertension on control of the diastolic blood pressure in individuals with a diagnosis of essential hypertension. Using the pre-test, post-test design, study participants were measured on knowledge about essential hypertension and diastolic blood pressure before and after intervention. Six hypotheses were tested, three related to control of blood pressure, and three related to knowledge about essential hypertension. There was no significant difference between the experimental and control groups on diastolic blood pressure readings at the conclusion of the study. There was a significant difference between the experimental and control groups on post-test scores on knowledge of essential hypertension. It was concluded that structured teaching had no significant effect upon control of the diastolic blood pressure. Instruction increased knowledge, but not blood pressure control.
In a randomized, controlled clinical trial, 110 edentulous patients with atrophic mandibles were treated with International Team for Oral Implantology-dental implants using three different treatment strategies: a mandibular overdenture supported by two implants with ball attachments, two implants with an interconnecting bar, or four interconnected implants. The patients' opinions and their social functioning were evaluated by means of a questionnaire directly before and 16 months after treatment. Before treatment most patients had complaints about the retention of their mandibular denture. Sixteen months after treatment almost all patients were generally satisfied with their dentures. Since no significant difference was found between the three treatment strategies, it was concluded that simple implant treatment such as an overdenture retained by two ball attachments is sufficient.

Empirical therapy with cefoperazone was compared with cefoperazone plus amikacin in granulocytopenic and nongranulocytopenic febrile patients. In nonneutropenic patients the overall response rate to cefoperazone was 88%; 10 of 12 gram-negative bacteremic patients were cured. Cefoperazone plus amikacin resulted in an 88% overall response rate and cured 14 of 15 patients with bacteremia. In neutropenic patients the overall response rate was 77% with cefoperazone alone and 73% with cefoperazone plus amikacin; the cure rates for gram-negative bacteremias were 8 of 11 and 6 of 12 patients, respectively. Our findings support the concept of single-drug empirical therapy with cefoperazone in febrile cancer patients, whether granulocytopenic or not, especially when gram-negative bacteremias are predominantly caused by Escherichia coli or Klebsiella species. The issue of Pseudomonas spp. and other more resistant pathogens needs further assessment with a larger number of patients.

BACKGROUND: It is often difficult to administer extended antibiotic therapy in the hospital for right-sided Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis. Although the effectiveness of single-drug therapy given for 4 to 6 weeks and that of two-drug therapy given for 2 weeks have been shown, no data are available on the effectiveness of short-course single-drug therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of cloxacillin alone with that of cloxacillin plus gentamicin for the 2-week treatment of right-sided S. aureus endocarditis in intravenous drug users.
DESIGN: Open, randomized study.
SETTING: An academic tertiary care hospital in Barcelona, Spain.
PATIENTS: 90 consecutive intravenous drug users who had isolated tricuspid valve endocarditis caused by methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, had no allergy to study medications, and had no systemic infectious complications that required prolonged therapy. An efficacy subset consisted of 74 of these patients who did not meet an exclusion criterion.
INTERVENTION: Cloxacillin (2 g intravenously every 4 hours for 14 days) alone or combined with gentamicin (1 mg/kg of body weight intravenously every 8 hours for 7 days).
MEASUREMENTS: Clinical or microbiological evidence of active infection after 2 weeks of therapy, relapse of staphylococcal infection, or death.
RESULTS: In an analysis of the efficacy subset, treatment was successful in 34 of the 38 patients who received cloxacillin alone (89% [95% CI, 75% to 97%]) and 31 of the 36 patients who received cloxacillin plus gentamicin (86% [CI, 71% to 95%]). Three patients died: one in the cloxacillin group and two in the combination therapy group. Of the 37 patients who completed 2-week treatment with cloxacillin, 34 (92%) were cured, and 3 (8%) needed prolonged treatment to cure the infection. Of the 34 patients who completed 2-week treatment with cloxacillin plus gentamicin, 32 (94%) were cured and 2 (6%) required treatment for 4 weeks. One patient in the combination group had relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: A penicillinase-resistant penicillin used as single-agent therapy for 2 weeks was effective for most patients with isolated tricuspid endocarditis caused by methicillin-susceptible S. aureus. Adding gentamicin did not appear to provide any therapeutic advantages. Additional studies to confirm the therapeutic equivalence of short-course therapy with penicillinase-resistant penicillin alone and therapy with combined regimens are warranted.

CRD SUMMARY: The review found that statins may reduce one-month mortality following acute coronary syndrome if treatment is initiated on the first day of hospitalisation. These conclusions require cautious interpretation due to limitations in the review that included potential publication bias, failure to assess study quality and poor reporting.
In this study we examined the frequency of infection and its consequences in a Veterans Administration medical center nursing home care unit during its first 9 months of operation. A total of 231 patients were enrolled and were followed up for an average stay of 115 days. Sixty-nine infections occurred in 50 patients and yielded a period prevalence rate of 22% and an infection incidence rate of 2.6 infections per 1000 days of patient care. Symptomatic urinary tract infections, pneumonia, and skin and soft tissue infections accounted for 41%, 32%, and 17% of the infections, respectively. Staphylococci, streptococci, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli were the most common bacterial isolates. Thirty-four episodes of infection (49%) required administration of parenteral antibiotics in the nursing home care unit, and 21 episodes (30%) necessitated transfer to the acute care hospital for management. Infection caused one death and contributed to the death of 4 of the 55 other patients who died during the study period.

We studied heart rate and rhythm changes during sevoflurane inhalation induction in 60 healthy, unpremedicated infants. Patients were allocated randomly to receive an incremental (2% sevoflurane, increased every four to six breaths by 2% increments, to 8%) or high-concentration induction technique (8% sevoflurane from the outset). The ECG was recorded for 330 s (30 s pre- and 300 s postinduction) using a mini-Holter device (Recollect Dual Channel, Hertford Medical) and later analysed by an independent observer. Twelve patients developed nodal rhythm (six in each group), but no other dysrhythmias were recorded. The onset of nodal rhythm was associated with bradycardia (< 80 bpm) in seven out of 12 cases, and occurred significantly earlier in the high-concentration group (median 123 (range 99-139) s versus 164 (127-138) s). Its duration was similar in both groups (62 (2-84) s versus 90 (20-167) s). These findings highlight the importance of using continuous ECG analysis when studying volatile anaesthetic agents in young children.

The neutropenic diet is an intervention that excludes certain foods, especially fresh fruits and vegetables, from the diets of pediatric oncology patients to reduce infection rate. The purpose of this study was to demonstrate a safe and feasible methodology to evaluate the infection rate in pediatric cancer patients randomized to the neutropenic diet or to Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved food safety guidelines. Pediatric oncology patients receiving myelosuppressive chemotherapy were randomized to the neutropenic diet or to FDA food safety guidelines and followed through one chemotherapy cycle. The primary outcome was febrile neutropenia. Secondary outcomes were adherence and diet tolerability. Nineteen patients were enrolled. Four patients on each diet arm developed febrile neutropenia. The adherence rate was 94% for the neutropenic diet and 100% for the food safety guidelines. Although patients were able to tolerate both diets, there was more reported difficulty adhering to the neutropenic diet. Infection rates for children with cancer on the neutropenic diet were similar to those for patients following food safety guidelines. The results of this study suggest that a larger randomized trial to determine the effectiveness of food safety guidelines in minimizing the risk of food borne infection is safe and feasible in children with cancer.

Numerous studies have concluded that work group teamwork leads to higher staff job satisfaction, increased patient safety, improved quality of care, and greater patient satisfaction. Although there have been studies on the impact of multidisciplinary teamwork in healthcare, the teamwork among nursing staff on a patient care unit has received very little attention from researchers. In this study, an intervention to enhance teamwork and staff engagement was tested on a medical unit in an acute care hospital. The results showed that the intervention resulted in a significantly lower patient fall rate, staff ratings of improved teamwork on the unit, and lower staff turnover and vacancy rates. Patient satisfaction ratings approached, but did not reach, statistical significance.

Reducing the Risk is a theory-based, sexuality education curriculum shown to influence the knowledge and behaviors of secondary students. This study determined whether the behavioral effects of the curriculum could be duplicated in a southern, rural state. In a quasiexperimental design, pretest and posttest inventories were administered to students in treatment and comparison groups to determine the influence of Reducing the Risk on sexual behaviors. Results of the 18-month study indicated students receiving the curriculum significantly delayed initiating sexual intercourse. Sexually active students in the treatment group were significantly more likely to protect themselves from STD/HIV and pregnancy than sexually active students in the comparison group. In addition, students receiving Reducing the Risk showed a significant increase in parent-child communication about sexual issues. These results reinforce previous research that found positive behavioral effects for students receiving the Reducing the Risk curriculum.

The study examines the effect of moderate to high worm burdens of Trichuris trichiura infection on the cognitive functions of 159 school children (age 9-12 years) in Jamaica, using a double-blind placebo-controlled protocol. Results were evaluated by using a forward-stepwise multiple linear regression. Removal of worms led to a significant improvement in tests of auditory short-term memory (p less than 0.017; p less than 0.013), and scanning and retrieval of long-term memory (p less than 0.001). Nine weeks after treatment, there were no longer significant differences between the treated children and an uninfected Control group in these three tests of cognitive function. It is concluded that whipworm infection has an adverse effect on certain cognitive functions which is reversible by therapy.

Thirty four children with cystic fibrosis allocated to pseudomonas vaccine and control groups were studied for three years. No significant differences were observed in the numbers colonised by Pseudomonas aeruginosa or in the overall disease progress of the two groups.

The importance of assessing the impact of treatments for chronic conditions on an individual's quality of life has been well-established. In this randomized clinical trial, oral-health-related quality of life, measured with the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP), was compared between two groups of edentulous patients. One group (n = 54) received mandibular implant-supported overdentures, and the other group (n = 48) received conventional dentures. Assessments were performed pre-treatment and two months after the prostheses were delivered. The multivariate model showed that implant treatment was significantly associated with lower post-treatment OHIP scores (p = 0.0002), indicating a better quality of life. In addition, pretreatment OHIP scores, treatment allocation, age, sex, and marital status explained 31% of the variation in post-treatment OHIP scores (F = 0.0001). These results suggest that implant treatment provides significant short-term improvement over conventional treatment in oral-health-related quality of life.

A survey was carried out among patent medicine dealers to evaluate their practices that militate against laws governing prescriptions-only medicines in Nigeria. Questionnaires were distributed to 46 patent medicine dealers and later collected from them on appointment. Analysis of the results showed that all the patent medicine dealers were aware of the law governing the sale of prescription drugs in Nigeria. Seventy-five per cent of them stock such drugs. Patent medicine dealers obtain their drugs largely from sales representative of pharmaceutical companies as well as from industries. Inappropriate use of sales boys and girls in patent medicine stores and defective government policies were all investigated.

Over the past decade, several studies have attempted to determine whether integrating psychiatric and substance abuse treatment leads to better outcome for patients with comorbid schizophrenia and substance use disorders. A recent (1999) Cochrane Review (1) analyzed the effectiveness of prospective randomized studies of integrated treatment approaches, and concluded that there was no clear evidence for superiority of integrated treatment. This paper describes one such integrated treatment approach, in Beth Israel Medical Center's COPAD (Combined Psychiatric and Addictive Disorders) program. We summarize findings from an initial outcome study and a recent replication study; and describe clinical and research issues relevant to this population. Our data suggests the benefits of integrated treatment for patients with addictive disorders and schizophrenia, at least with regard to treatment retention. Clinical issues for such patients include identification of patients at risk, proper assessment and treatment planning, decision-making about mainstreaming vs. referral to specialized programs, and the importance of initial engagement and ongoing reengagement in successful treatment.

One hundred and sixty patients with a primary diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder were enrolled in a multicentre, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of fluvoxamine. After a placebo washout phase, patients were randomized to treatment with placebo or fluvoxamine (100-300 mg/day) for 10 weeks. Seventy-eight patients in each group were evaluable for efficacy. Fluvoxamine was significantly more effective than placebo as assessed by the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS), the National Institute of Mental Health Obsessive-Compulsive (NIMH-OC) scale and the Global Improvement item of the Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale. The percentage of patients classified as "responders" (much or very much improved according to the Global Improvement item) was also significantly higher in the fluvoxamine group from Week 6 onwards, with 33.3% of fluvoxamine-treated patients and 9.0% of those given placebo classified as "responders" at endpoint. The "responders" to fluvoxamine experienced a substantial clinical benefit as reflected in decreases in their Y-BOCS and NIMH-OC scores. Fluvoxamine was well tolerated with the majority of adverse events considered mild or moderate.

Thirty-eight patients with primary obsessive-compulsive disorder participated in a 10-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the potent, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine was significantly better than placebo on two of three measures of improvement in obsessive-compulsive symptoms. The authors also compared studies of the serotonergic agents fluvoxamine, sertraline, fluoxetine, and clomipramine and found that a greater effect size was associated with less serotonergic specificity and that some ability to affect other neurotransmitter systems may be a necessary but not sufficient requirement for antiobsessional activity. These data lend only partial support to a serotonin hypothesis of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that dual time-point 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) had similar sensitivity and specificity to single time-point FDG-PET in the diagnosis of malignant pulmonary nodules, with no additional value. Weaknesses in the reporting and analytic methods and the absence of data on single time-point FDG-PET make these conclusions unreliable.
We assessed the impact of three conditions on one-year smoking cessation rates. Physicians in 70 community general practices were randomly allocated by practice to one of three groups: In the usual care group, smoking patients were to receive the care they normally would receive. In the gum only group, physicians were asked to speak to patients about smoking cessation and offer nicotine gum. In the gum plus group, physicians were trained in the experimental intervention. This intervention involved advice to stop smoking, the setting of a quit date, the offer of nicotine gum, and four follow-up visits. Smoking cessation was measured by self-report after one year and validated using saliva cotinine measures. Using a criterion of at least three months of abstinence, 8.8% of the patients of the trained physicians had stopped smoking at the one-year follow-up compared with 4.4% and 6.1% of the patients in the usual care and gum only groups, respectively.

Changes in relatives' affective attitudes are important contributors to the impact of family psychoeducational programmes on the course of schizophrenia. It remains unclear whether similar changes occur in the interactional style of schizophrenic patients participating in psychoeducational treatment. This study examined changes in the interactional style (coping style) of 33 schizophrenic patients in individual or family treatment. Significant changes were seen in the interactional style of the patients participating in the individual treatment. Similar changes were evident, but not significant, in the family treatment group. The quality of patient interactional style before or after treatment did not predict relapse in either group. Changes in relatives' interactional style early in family treatment are necessary to affect the short-term course of schizophrenia. Modification in patient behaviour during the early phase does not have similar predictive value.
In a double blind trial, 28 male chronic schizophrenic in-patients received either pimozide, given once weekly, or fluphenazine decanoate, given mostly once fortnightly. There was no difference in relapse rates over nine months. However, three-quarters of the patients on pimozide who completed the trial developed at least mild tardive dyskinesia. All patients on pimozide lost weight, the average loss being 5.4 kg (12 lbs). Plasma pimozide levels suggested satisfactory drug compliance. Plasma prolactin levels confirmed that in the pimozide group there was fluctuating dopamine receptor antagonism, while in the fluphenazine group average plasma prolactin levels throughout most of the interval between injections were at the upper limit of normal.

This investigation compared the results of 2 types of wound closure after mandibular third molar removal. In both the test group and the control group, the molars were removed using a mucoperiosteal flap as described by Szmyd; a wedge of tissue distal to the second molar was removed before closure to secure self-irrigation of the empty socket. The test group received a gauze drain partially submerged into the socket to secure more drainage and to prevent primary wound healing. Examinations were performed 2 days and 7 days after surgery, and pain, swelling, trismus and wound condition were recorded. Analyses of variance indicated that there was no significant difference between the 2 types of wound closure.

Declines in various cognitive abilities, particularly executive control functions, are observed in older adults. An important goal of cognitive training is to slow or reverse these age-related declines. However, opinion is divided in the literature regarding whether cognitive training can engender transfer to a variety of cognitive skills in older adults. In the current study, the authors trained older adults in a real-time strategy video game for 23.5 hr in an effort to improve their executive functions. A battery of cognitive tasks, including tasks of executive control and visuospatial skills, were assessed before, during, and after video-game training. The trainees improved significantly in the measures of game performance. They also improved significantly more than the control participants in executive control functions, such as task switching, working memory, visual short-term memory, and reasoning. Individual differences in changes in game performance were correlated with improvements in task switching. The study has implications for the enhancement of executive control processes of older adults.

OBJECTIVE: Accepted treatments for cigarette smoking rarely achieve abstinence rates of >35% at 1 year. Low rates may reflect failure to provide extended and multifocal treatment for this complex and chronic addiction. Using a chronic disease model of smoking, the authors undertook a study to determine the effects of long-term antidepressant and psychological treatment.
METHOD: One hundred sixty smokers of > or =10 cigarettes/day were randomly assigned to one of four treatment conditions in a two-by-two (nortriptyline versus placebo by brief versus extended treatment) design. All subjects received 8 weeks of a transdermal nicotine patch, five group counseling sessions, and active or placebo treatment. Interventions for subjects in brief treatment ended at this point. Subjects in extended treatment continued taking drug or placebo to week 52 and received an additional 9 monthly counseling sessions, with checkup telephone calls midway through each session. Subjects were assessed at baseline and weeks 12, 24, 36, and 52. The principal outcome variables were repeated abstinence at each assessment after the first over a 1-year period and a point prevalence of 7 days of abstinence.
RESULTS: At week 52, point-prevalence abstinence rates with missing subjects imputed as smokers were 30% for placebo brief treatment, 42% for placebo extended treatment, 18% for active brief treatment, and 50% for active extended treatment. With missing subjects omitted, these rates were 32%, 57%, 21%, and 56%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive extended treatments that combine drug and psychological interventions can produce consistent abstinence rates that are substantially higher than those in the literature.

CRD SUMMARY: This review compared haemodialysis, haemofiltration, haemodiafiltration and acetate-free biofiltration for patients with end-stage renal disease. The authors concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine the most effective method of extracorporeal renal replacement. This was generally a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be robust.
Twenty-six parturients scheduled to receive spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section were randomized to receive either isotonic saline 750 ml plus 20 ml/kg (group A) or 750 ml plus 500 ml (group B) before subarachnoid administration of bupivacaine 13 mg. Ephedrine 0.15 mg/kg i.v. followed by an infusion 0.4 mg.kg(-1) h(-1) were then administered in group B. In both groups ephedrine 10 mg/min i.v. was given if the mean arterial blood pressure decreased more than 10 mmHg. Despite the fluid preload and large doses of ephedrine noted {median (range), group A 30 mg (10-80), group B 92 mg (25-194)}, hypotension, sometimes accompanied by nausea, still occurred. Mean maternal arterial was significantly lower in group A than in group B 5-10 min after induction of spinal anaesthesia (P < 0.05). There was no difference in the frequency of nausea or vomiting, Apgar score, or pH in umbilical cord blood. One neonate in group A and 2 in group B were acidotic. In conclusion, a reduced volume loading could be compensated with an increased ephedrine administration after induction of spinal anaesthesia, without increasing the incidence of hypotension or other maternal or neonatal complications. However, the fluid volumes and/or ephedrine doses used were not sufficient to prevent hypotension altogether.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the effects of estradiol vaginal tablet with conjugated estrogen cream on urogenital symptoms, vaginal health index, vaginal cytology, endometrial thickness, and plasma estradiol level in postmenopausal women.
METHODS: Fifty-three women with urogenital symptoms were randomized to local vaginal treatment of 25 microg estradiol tablet or 1 g of conjugated estrogen cream for 12 weeks. They were assessed for urogenital symptoms, vaginal health index, vaginal cytology, endometrial thickness and estradiol level.
RESULTS: Forty-eight women completed the treatment. Both groups showed improvement of urogenital symptoms, vaginal health index, and vaginal cytology after the first 4 weeks of treatment. Conjugated estrogen cream showed superior efficacy in alleviating vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. Two cases of endometrial proliferation were noted.
CONCLUSIONS: Estradiol vaginal tablet and conjugated estrogen cream were effective in treating urogenital symptoms, the restoration of normal vaginal epithelium and reduction of vaginal pH in postmenopausal women. However, 2 cases of endometrial proliferation were noted.

The National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT) has published many articles reporting the various outcomes of lung volume reduction surgery versus medical treatment for patients with severe emphysema. However, long and complex clinical trials like NETT that involve both medical and surgical issues generate multiple manuscripts over a period of years and report an array of various outcomes. As a result, the essential findings of the trial may appear to be fragmented to the clinician or clinical researcher or be lost among the many medical reports published each year. In this review, we summarize in one publication the major medical and surgical outcomes of NETT.

The distribution of birth weights among the infants of 172 Gambian primigravidae who had received chemoprophylaxis with Maloprim (pyrimethamine+dapsone) during pregnancy was compared with that of the infants of 149 primigravidae who had received placebo. Administration of chemoprophylaxis led to a reduction in the prevalence of low birth weight babies and to an increase in the median birth weight. However, these changes were not accompanied by a comparable increase in the prevalence of high birth weight babies. The perinatal mortality rate was lower, although not significantly so, among the babies of women who had received chemoprophylaxis. Thus, no evidence was found to support the view that administration of chemoprophylaxis might increase the risks of delivery by causing cephalo/pelvic disproportion.

In our study we compared weight loss among non-Hispanic whites (NHW), black Afro-Americans (BAA) and Hispanic Americans (HA) following vertical banded gastroplasty (VBG) and vertical banded gastroplastygastric bypass (VBG-RGB). From a total of 1222 patients, 662 qualified for the study (471 VBG, 211 VBG-RGB) based on type of surgery, follow-up and ethnicity. When comparing percentage excess weight loss, VBG-RGB patients lost significantly more than VBG patients. VBG-RGB was also a more efficacious operation when comparing each ethnic group separately. For female patients undergoing VBG, BAA and HA lost significantly less weight than NHW. Ethnicity plays an important role In post surgical weight loss for VBG patients and should be considered along with other more recognized predictors when reporting results. The discrepancy in weight loss reported by various authors following VBG could be the result of differences in the ethnic composition of their patients. Poor weight loss among BAA and HA females undergoing VBG should be an Indication for a more aggressive surgical approach in these ethnic groups. Because VBG produces only moderate weight loss, VBG-RGB is our preferred operation.

From June 1985 to September 1987, 202 adults were enrolled in a randomized, double-blinded study comparing ciprofloxacin (500 mg) with sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim (160 mg/800 mg) or placebo for adults with acute diarrhea. All patients were treated on the day of presentation and received medication on a twice-daily schedule (every 12 hours) for 5 days. Bacterial isolates from these patients included 35 Campylobacter, 18 Shigella, and 15 Salmonella. Treatment at the time of presentation with ciprofloxacin compared with placebo shortened the duration of diarrhea (2.4 vs 3.4 days), and increased the percentage of patients cured or improved by treatment days 1, 3, 4, and 5. Similar significant differences for sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim compared with placebo were not seen.

We set out to compare a policy of two-layered postpartum perineal repair leaving the skin unsutured with a policy of three-layered repair, which involved skin closure. Parturients who sustained a second-degree tear or an episiotomy in four Nigerian centers were randomised to have either a two-layered repair (417 women) or a three-layered repair (406 women). Fewer women in the two-layered group reported perineal pain at 48 hours (57% vs. 65%, relative risk [RR] 0.87, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.78-0.97) and 14 days postpartum (22% vs. 28%, RR 0.77, CI 0.61-0.98). The two-layered repair was also associated with reduced risk of suture removal (6% vs. 10%, RR 0.62, CI 0.39-0.99), and less superficial dyspareunia at 3 months (6% vs. 12%, RR 0.52, CI 0.33-0.81). The rates of wound healing were similar between the two groups. Leaving the skin unsutured during postpartum perineal repair reduces perineal pain and dyspareunia.

The clinical effects of pentobarbital, 100 mg, and diazepam, 10 mg, given orally as preoperative medications before dental surgery were tested in a double-blind study in 50 adult patients. The concnetrations of pentobarbital and diazepam (plus its three active metabolites) in plasma, measured by gas chromatography, were correlated with their clinical effects as assessed both subjectively and objectively (sedation, apprehension, excitement, dizziness, pre- and post-operative emetic effect, increase or decrease in systolic blood pressure, pulse rate, and ease of venipuncture). No significant difference in the effects of these two agents was observed, nor was there any obvious relationship between the concentration in plasma and clinical effect.

Women (182) undergoing elective orthopaedic surgery under general anaesthesia received 100 or 200 mg alizapride, 1.25 mg droperidol, 20 mg metoclopramide or a saline placebo intravenously 5-10 min before the end of anaesthesia in a double-blind random fashion to prevent post-operative nausea and vomiting. Administration of the same anti-emetic was repeated during 24 h post-operatively if the patient complained of nausea or retched or vomited. Significantly fewer patients given any of the anti-emetics prophylactically were nauseated or vomited in comparison with patients given saline. The incidence of nausea and vomiting in the saline group was 83%, while in those patients who received an anti-emetic it was as follows: droperidol 35% (P less than 0.001 vs. saline), alizapride, 100 mg 46% (P less than 0.01), alizapride 200 mg 53% (P less than 0.05) and metoclopramide 58% (P less than 0.05). The number of patients needing an additional dose of the same substance in the post-operative period was significantly higher in the saline group (67%) than in the groups which had received droperidol (32%, P less than 0.01) and alizapride 100 mg (37%, P less than 0.05) or 200 mg (33%, P less than 0.05). The patients who received metoclopramide, however, did not differ statistically from the saline group in the treatment of nausea and vomiting. It is concluded that droperidol was the most effective, and metoclopramide the least effective, anti-emetic in this study.

The authors examine the antiemetic effects of 1 mg clebopride administered iv after surgery, vs a placebo, by making a double blind randomized study on two groups of 40 women comparable by age and weight. The 2 groups of outpatients, admitted for short gynecological surgery, underwent diagnostic uterine curettage. They were anaesthetized with a cocktail of 2.5 mcg/kg fentanyl and 0.25 mg/kg ketamine, on spontaneous respiration. Nausea, vomiting and the other side effects were evaluated 3-6 hours after surgery. Statistically, clebopride proved more effective than placebo against nausea and vomiting (P ranging between 0.05-0.01), with no relevant side effects.

The present study examined the impact of Project DARE (Drug Abuse Resistance Education), a widespread drug-prevention program, 10 years after administration. A total of 1,002 individuals who in 6th grade had either received DARE or a standard drug-education curriculum, were reevaluated at age 20. Few differences were found between the 2 groups in terms of actual drug use, drug attitudes, or self-esteem, and in no case did the DARE group have a more successful outcome than the comparison group. Possible reasons why DARE remains so popular, despite the lack of documented efficacy, are offered.
Recent studies have suggested that a prevention program that addresses the social influences that encourage smoking can be effective in deterring cigarette use by adolescents. This study presents 4- and 5-year follow-up results from two studies which evaluated three variations of this social influences model and compared them to a health consequences program and an existing-curriculum condition. The results suggest that a seventh-grade program, built around the social influences model and taught jointly by same-age peer leaders and local classroom teachers, may reduce 4-year weekly- and daily-smoking cumulative incidence rates, providing the first evidence for any long-term effects for the social influences model. However, the results also suggest that any long-term effects from such interventions are probably limited and may depend heavily on the manner in which the social influences model is translated during the intervention. Additional follow-up studies are needed to clarify the long-term effects of these intervention programs.

A grade five through eight substance abuse prevention program, later incorporated into the Michigan Model for Comprehensive School Health Education, was developed, implemented, and evaluated. Results focus on students who received seven lessons on alcohol in grade six, and eight lessons on tobacco, alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine in grade seven taught by their regular classroom teachers (after a 6-hour training in the social pressures resistance skills curriculum). Students (N = 442) received either two years of the program or none, and completed individually-coded questionnaires. Repeated measures analysis of variance resulted in significant treatment by occasion interactions on the use of alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana, cocaine, and other drugs, as well as on knowledge. At the end of grade seven, program students' rates of substance use had increased significantly less and knowledge of alcohol pressures, effects, and skills to resist had increased significantly more than those of comparison students.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a review of the evidence from 3 experimental trials of Project Towards No Drug Abuse (TND), a senior-high-school-based drug abuse prevention program.
METHODS: Theoretical concepts, subjects, designs, hypotheses, findings, and conclusions of these trials are presented. A total of 2,468 high school youth from 42 schools in southern California were surveyed.
RESULTS: The Project TND curriculum shows reductions in the use of cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana, hard drugs, weapon carrying, and victimization. Most of these results were replicated across the 3 trials.
CONCLUSION: Project TND is an effective drug and violence prevention program for older teens, at least for one-year follow-up.

The aim of this prospective trial was to compare the efficacy of gastric lavage, activated charcoal and ipecacuanha at limiting the absorption of paracetamol in overdose and to assess the significance of the continued absorption of paracetamol following treatment. Patients aged 16 and over who had ingested 5 gms or more of paracetamol within 4h of admission were entered into the trial. The percentage fall in plasma paracetamol level was used as the measure of the success of a treatment at limiting absorption. The mean percentage fall was 39.3 for gastric lavage, 52.2 for activated charcoal and 40.7 for ipecacuanha, with a significant difference between the treatment methods (p = 0.03). Activated charcoal was more effective at limiting the absorption of paracetamol following overdose than either gastric lavage or ipecacuanha induced emesis. In treated patients continuing paracetamol absorption is not significant if more than 2h have elapsed since ingestion.

The use of the 'PEP' mask with forced expiratory coughing was compared with conventional physiotherapy over a one month period. No difference was shown in symptom scores, sputum production, or simple lung function tests. The mask was well accepted and allowed independent treatment by older patients.

AIM: To assess the efficacy of oral ritodrine in the form of sustained-release capsules for maintenance of uterine quiescence after successful treatment of threatened preterm labor.
METHODS: We randomized 120 women with singleton pregnancy who were successfully treated for threatened preterm labor before 34 completed weeks to receive either maintenance tocolysis with two 40 mg ritodrine sustained release capsules three times a day (study group, n=62) or no treatment (control group, n=58) for three days. The primary outcome measure was the recurrent episode of threatened preterm labor within 72 hours, which was defined as regular palpable uterine contractions and change in cervical effacement or cervical dilatation on clinical examination. Secondary outcome measures included the incidence of preterm birth, neonatal adverse outcomes, and maternal side effects.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the frequency of recurrent episodes of threatened preterm labor requiring another course of intravenous treatment between the study (8/62) and control (6/58) group of women (P=0.879). No differences were found between the study and control groups in any of the predefined secondary outcome measures, ie, delivery before 37 weeks (13/62 vs 7/58, respectively; P=0.288), delivery before 34 weeks (3/62 vs 1/58, respectively; P=0.682) and birth weight (3037-/+573 g vs 3223-/+423 g, respectively, P=0.862). There were more reported maternal side effects in the study group than in control group (47/62 vs 23/58, respectively; P(<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Additional maintenance ritodrine therapy was unnecessary in women with singleton pregnancy who had an episode of threatened preterm labor successfully treated with intravenous tocolytic therapy.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00290173.

Forty-five patients with Stages II and III cervical carcinoma were randomized to receive either radiation or cis-dichlorodiammine platinum (II) (cis-DPP) with radiation. Cis-DPP was administered in bolus injections of 25 mg/m2 at weekly intervals until completion of radium application. Complete response was noted in 11/20 (55%) patients in the radiochemotherapy group compared to 5/25 (20%) patients in the radiation group (P less than 0.025). No enhanced toxicities were observed with the addition of cis-DPP to radiation. The combined use of cis-DPP and radiotherapy offers promising potential in improving local-regional control of advanced cervical carcinoma.

Twenty-four women with stress urinary incontinence of slight to moderate grade were treated with phenylpropanolamine (PPA), po 50 mg twice daily, and placebo for periods of two weeks according to randomized double-blind cross-over schedule. A significant increase in maximum urethral closure pressure (MUCP) was found after treatment with PPA compared to placebo, but functional urethral length was unchanged. Number of leakage episodes were significantly reduced during PPA treatment, but micturition frequency was unchanged. Fourteen women preferred PPA, 4 preferred placebo, and 6 considered PPA and placebo to be ineffective. The scored improvements obtained by PPA were highly significant when tested against the scored placebo effect. There was a significant correlation between subjective assessment and improvement in number of leakage episodes and increase of MUCP. Plasma-PPA levels showed no significant correlation with any of the effect variables. Adverse reactions were few and negligible.

CRD SUMMARY: The review found that there was little evidence on the safety and effectiveness of proton radiation for indications of the eye and that better-quality studies were needed. These conclusions appear reliable.
This report examines the hypothesis that for phenelzine to be more effective than placebo it is necessary to achieve at least 80% inhibition of platelet MAO activity. This hypothesis was examined in the context of a double-blind comparison of phenelzine, amitriptyline and placebo in depressed patients. When phenelzine became significantly more effective than placebo at 4 weeks, the average MAO inhibition was 85%. By the 5th week, with MAO inhibition greater than 90%, phenelzine was significantly more effective than amitriptyline. A highly significant correlation was noted between improvement and MAO inhibition within the phenelzine group.

PRINCIPLES: Alveolar osteitis (dry socket) is the most common complication following the extraction of permanent teeth. This study was undertaken to compare the effect of two chlorhexidine rinse protocols on the incidence of alveolar osteitis in patients undergoing surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molar teeth.
METHODS: A prospective randomized clinical trial was conducted among 99 subjects. Patients were randomly assigned into two groups. Subjects were instructed to rinse twice daily with 15 ml of chlorhexidine rinse 30 seconds for one week before and one week after surgery (group I) or one week after surgery (group II). Postoperatively, all patients were instructed to return in one week or sooner if bothersome pain increased or persisted. Data were collected regarding abnormal healing, presence of necrotic tissue, exposed bone, and absence of clot.
RESULTS: The results indicated group I and group II were not statistically significant different in the reduction of alveolar osteitis.
CONCLUSIONS: To reduce alveolar osteitis after impacted third molar surgery, it was observed use of postoperative chlorhexidine rinse was adequate. The postoperative use of chlorhexidine is more feasible than both preoperative and postoperative use.

OBJECTIVE: There is a lack of consensus among surgeons over interrupted versus continuous methods of abdominal wound closure. The objective of this study was to perform a meta-analysis to estimate the pooled odds ratio (OR) for dehiscence and incisional hernia in the interrupted technique of laparotomy wound closure as compared to the continuous technique.
METHODS: All randomized, controlled trials comparing continuous and interrupted methods of laparotomy wound closure, with burst abdomen and/or incisional hernia as the outcomes, were included in the meta-analysis. MEDLINE, Clinical Evidence and the Cochrane Library were searched. Burst abdomen and incisional hernia were the two primary outcomes.
RESULTS: Twenty-three studies were identified, with a total of 10,900 patients. The interrupted method of closure was associated with significantly less dehiscence as compared with the continuous method (OR, 0.576; p = 0.014; relative risk reduction, 39.8%; number needed to treat, 143). The interrupted technique was also found to be better in the nonabsorbable suture, vertical incision and mass closure subgroups. However, no difference in the hernia risk was found between the two methods.
CONCLUSION: Interrupted laparotomy wound closure reduces the odds of dehiscence by half compared with continuous wound closure.

Studies on the treatment and prevention of iron deficiency anemia, in pregnant and nonpregnant women and in men, were conducted in Thailand and Burma. The effects of the dose of Fe, duration of Fe administration, additional supplementation with folate, mode of supplement delivery (either supervised or unsupervised), and the presence of Hb(AE) were studied. The frequency and severity of side effects were also recorded. Fe administration resulted in an increase in hemoglobin concentration in all anemic individuals but approximately 20% failed to reach normality. The length of administration and the dose influenced the results. Frequency and severity of side effects increased with the dose of Fe administered. Folate supplementation did not affect the results. It appears possible to integrate a program of prevention and treatment of Fe deficiency anemia in a primary health-care system but the constraints and limitations of achievable results should be recognized.
To determine if neuroleptic treatment changes the natural course of schizophrenia, 22 studies were reviewed in which relatively similar patients were or were not given neuroleptics at specific times during the course of their illness. Nineteen of the studies were from first- or predominantly first-break populations. While there was little consensus among the authors of the studies reviewed, a reanalysis of the data indicates that early intervention with neuroleptics in first-break schizophrenic patients increases the likelihood of an improved long-term course. This finding is similar to that of earlier investigators who indicated there was a decrease in patients with the more severe forms of the illness following the introduction of convulsive therapies. Furthermore, there is evidence that stable schizophrenic patients whose neuroleptics are discontinued and have relapses may have a difficult time returning to their previous level of function. The findings describe in this paper have implications for both the treatment of schizophrenia and for understanding the pathophysiological processes that determine the course of the disorder.

An intracervical levonorgestrel-releasing mini-T device was tried as contraceptive in 100 fertile multiparous women for 3 years. This device release about 10 micrograms/day. The results were compared with those of an intrauterine levonorgestrel device and copper-T-200 (Cu-T-200). The continuation rates of the three device did not reveal any significant differences at 1, 2 and 3 years. Incidence of unintended pregnancies and removals due to bleeding and pain was comparable to those of Cu-T-200 but higher than those of intrauterine levonorgestrel device. The number of days of bleeding and spotting for both levonorgestrel devices was significantly lower than those for Cu-T-200.

A comparative study of the Progestasert (UPS) and the Nova-T in 326 randomly selected women was carried out. The observation period was 1 year. The over-all continuation rates for the two types of intrauterine devices (IUDs) were similar. The expulsion rate for the Nova-T (9.2%) was considerably higher (P = 0.001) than that for the UPS (1.2%). Medical removals for bleeding/pain were more frequent (P = 0.028) for the UPS (15.4%) as compared with the Nova-T (6.1%). The pregnancy rate for the UPS (Pearl index = 4.8) was insignificantly higher than that for the Nova-T (Pearl index = 2.8). Two of the pregnancies in the UPS group were ectopic. No significant changes in the reactive immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, or IgM) were observed in either of the groups. Our results indicate that neither of these two IUDs is preferable to the already existing medicated IUDs, such as the Copper T or the Copper 7.

Data obtained from questionnaires on the occurrence of dysmenorrhoea in women using IUDs inserted randomly (146 of them Progestasert and 149 Copper 7) are analyzed. In both groups a reduction in the intensity of menstrual cramps was observed over 12 months of use. Although these reductions are significant in each group, they are slightly higher in Progestasert users. However, on comparing the reduction tendencies of both groups, the difference between them is not significant. No significant differences become apparent either when comparing premenstrual and intermenstrual camps. The usefulness of simple questionnaires directed at detecting the nature of pain in currently used family planning forms for IUD users is discussed.

Medication reconciliation is a powerful and effective tool in the fight against preventable ADEs. Consequently, it is a focus of national patient safety and health care organization initiatives. Nurses need to understand the requirements and actively support the process as the right thing to do for their patients.

The present research consists of three studies examining the role of patients' stereotypes about health care providers in the health care decision process. Study 1 examined the association of stereotypes to health care satisfaction and help-seeking behavior among a low-income clinic sample; Study 2 examined the relationship of stereotypes to satisfaction and adherence to treatment among low-income individuals living with HIV; and Study 3 examined the association of stereotypes to satisfaction and help-seeking among a sample of homeless individuals. Overall findings indicate that individuals who held more negative stereotypes about physicians sought care less often when sick, were less satisfied with the care that they did obtain, and were less likely to adhere to physician recommendations for treatment. Moreover, African Americans, but not Whites, with more positive stereotypes reported better adherence in Study 2 and were more satisfied with their health care in Study 3. Our findings point to the need to better understand the role of patients' beliefs about health care in predicting health care satisfaction and health behaviors.

OBJECTIVE: We compared the performance characteristics of the 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) with body surface mapping (BSM) in patients presenting for evaluation of symptoms suggestive of acute coronary syndromes.
METHODS: The diagnostic test characteristics (sensitivity, specificity, likelihood ratios, and predictive values) for 12-lead ECG and BSM were computed using 3 different criterion standards.
RESULTS: Of the 150 patients enrolled, 19 were positive for acute coronary syndromes using the criterion standard of cardiac troponin T >0.1 ng/mL, percutaneous coronary intervention, more than 70% stenosis, abnormal noninvasive testing, and coronary artery bypass graft. Changes not known to be old on ECG and BSM had sensitivities of 10.5 (95% confidence interval [CI(95)], 1.8-34.5) and 15.8 (CI(95), 4.2-40.5), and specificities of 90.1 (CI(95), 83.3-94.4) and 86.3 (CI(95), 78.9-91.4), respectively.
CONCLUSION: In this emergency department population, both the BSM and the 12-lead ECG exhibited similar test characteristics.

Clinical trials have shown that garlic can reduce elevated blood cholesterol levels. No information, however, exist on its effects on normal lipid patterns. Therefore a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was conducted to determine the effects on blood lipids of 15 weeks' medication of garlic (600 mg dried garlic powder per day, Kwai, Lichtwer Pharma Berlin, standardised on 1.3% allicin) in 68 normal volunteers. During a two week "wash-out" period all measurements were stable. There was a significant drop (from 223 to 214mg/dl) in total cholesterol after 10 weeks' medication, triglycerides decreased numerically (from 124 to 118mg/dl) without reaching the level of significance. Blood pressure remained constant throughout. No changes occurred in the placebo group. It is concluded that the medication of garlic induces changes in blood lipids, even if these variables had been normal to start with.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that school-based physical activity interventions showed positive effects on psychological determinants, activity behaviour and health and fitness outcomes. The absence of a reliable synthesis along with shortcomings in the review methodology mean these conclusions cannot be considered reliable.
Infections among health-care workers (HCWs) have been a common feature of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) since its emergence. The majority of these infections have occurred in locations where infection-control precautions either had not been instituted or had been instituted but were not followed. Recommended infection-control precautions include the use of negative-pressure isolation rooms where available; N95 or higher level of respiratory protection; gloves, gowns, and eye protection; and careful hand hygiene. This report summarizes a cluster of SARS cases among HCWs in a hospital that occurred despite apparent compliance with recommended infection-control precautions.

The study examined the impact of counseling intensity (high vs. low) combined with either bupropion or the nicotine patch. Two hundred sixty participants smoking 6 to 15 cigarettes per day (cpd) were enrolled in a year-long study to examine the effects of treatment. Four groups of smokers under medication-blinded conditions were compared for treatment completion and abstinence at three follow-up points from the initiation of treatment (Weeks 12, 26, and 52). Both counseling groups had similar treatment completion rates (i.e., defined by a combination of counseling attendance and medication adherence levels). There was a main treatment effect for abstinence favoring the high counseling condition in early follow-up (Week 12) and for continuous abstinence. Participants with a history of heavier smoking (> or =20 cpd) and African American smokers were least likely to be smoke free at the end of the study. The study has implications for identifying the treatment needs of lighter smokers.

This Technology Overview was prepared using systematic review methodology and summarizes the findings of studies published as of July 15, 2011, on modern metal-on-metal hip implants. Analyses conducted on outcomes by two joint registries indicate that patients who receive metal-on-metal total hip arthroplasty (THA) and hip resurfacing are at greater risk for revision than are patients who receive THA using a different bearing surface combination. Data from these registries also indicate that larger femoral head components have higher revision rates and risk of revision and that older age is associated with increased revision risks of large-head metal-on-metal THA. Several studies noted a correlation between suboptimal hip implant positioning and higher wear rates, local metal debris release, and consequent local tissue reactions to metal debris. In addition, several studies reported elevated serum metal ion concentrations in patients with metal-on-metal hip articulations, although the clinical significance of these elevated ion concentrations remains unknown.

Molecular pathologic investigation of endomyocardial biopsy specimens from 26 patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy revealed viral genomes (parvovirus B19, human herpes virus 6, Epstein-Barr virus, and human cytomegalovirus) in 8 patients (30.7%) that were associated immunohistologically with interstitial inflammation. These findings indicate a high prevalence of virus-associated inflammatory changes in peripartum cardiomyopathy.

One hundred four patients with 124 episodes of urinary tract infection were studied. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was determined on diagnosis of each patient. Children with a CRP equal to or greater than 30 micrograms/ml (CRP-pos) differed significantly from those with values less than 30 micrograms/ml (CRP-neg) in age, clinical presentation, K type of Escherichia coli causing disease, frequency or radiographic abnormalities, and presence of antibody coating of bacteria in the urinary sediment. E. coli K1 strains caused disease significantly more often in CRP-pos than in CRP-neg patients, and children with K1 infections were younger than those with non-K1 infections. The antibody-coated bacteria test was neither sensitive nor specific for localization of infection in pediatric patients. Determination of K1 antibody concentrations in serum and urine of E. coli K1-infected children provided data supporting the measurement of CRP as one means of localizing urinary tract infections. Patients with CRP-neg infections were treated as successfully with four days of antimicrobial therapy as with ten days.

Although the central cholinergic deficits are still considered to be of primary importance in Alzheimer's disease, there is great need for an expansion of the pharmacological approach in this illness beyond the simple cholinergic replacement hypothesis. This report focuses on the concept of "combination chemotherapy" in Alzheimer's disease as the next generation of therapeutic strategies. Based on earlier positive findings in Alzheimer patients with the monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, 1-deprenyl, the authors speculate that a combination of physostigmine, the short-acting cholinesterase inhibitor, and 1-deprenyl might be more beneficial than either agent alone. The authors outline a sample paradigm for such combination studies, report preliminary data on the first 16 Alzheimer subjects to have received an initial combination of physostigmine and deprenyl, and point to other possible "combination chemotherapy" strategies for future study.

We conducted a double-blind study in 34 patients to compare the analgesic efficacy in acute renal colic using 2.5 g dipyrone combined with a spasmolytic agent and 30 mg ketorolac tromethamine, diluted in 100 ml saline solution and injected intravenously. Clinical criteria and the observation of red cells in urine were used for the diagnosis. The intensity of the pain and its development were measured using visual analogue scales (VAS) and a scale of items showing patient improvement. The side effects were spontaneously mentioned by the patients and elicited by direct questioning. It can be confirmed with a beta error of 0.10 that the analgesic effect obtained by both treatments is similar. Nevertheless, the combination of dipyrone and spasmolytic produces more side effects, possibly due to the spasmolytic agent.

The aim of the study was to analyse the survivorship of 60 total hip arthroplasties using the cementless Lord prosthesis in 51 patients with inflammatory joint disease. Patients were operated on between the years 1985 and 1988. The mean follow-up time was 13.8 (4.0-18.6) years. During the follow-up, one deep infection was encountered, and seven patients died of causes unrelated to the hip replacement. Revision surgery or death of the patient was used as an end point. The overall survival was 88.1% [95% confidence interval (CI) 76.6-94.1] for the stem, and 64.3% (95% CI 50.6-75.1) for the cup at 15 years. Causes for revision surgery were loosening of the cup in 17 hips, loosening of both components in five hips, and one deep infection.

The effect of nebulised salbutamol on the bronchial response to nebulised histamine was studied in five wheezy infants aged 3-12 months. The response to doubling concentrations of up to 8 g/l of histamine was assessed by the change in the maximum flow at FRC (VmaxFRC), measured by flow-volume curves produced during forced expiration with a pressure jacket. The concentration of histamine required to provoke a 30% fall in VmaxFRC (PC30) was measured. All of the infants responded to low concentrations of histamine during control tests before and after nebulised saline (mean PC30 1.07 and 0.51 g/l). On a separate day there was a similar response to histamine before salbutamol (PC30 0.57 g/l), but after salbutamol the response was completely abolished up to the maximum concentration of histamine in all subjects (PC30 greater than 8 g/l). Thus wheezy infants have highly effective beta 2 adrenoceptors in intrathoracic airways.

After undergoing metrizamide radiculography, 119 patients were randomly allocated to two groups, one group remaining ambulant and the other being kept in bed for 24 h. A member of staff who did not know the category allocation questioned each patient regarding the occurrence of side-effects 24 and 48 h after the procedure. It was found that the incidence and severity of complications was neither increased nor decreased by allowing the patient to remain ambulant.

Over the past 4 years, we have queried members of a hospital's medical, nursing and resident staffs and their students about their knowledge of hospital costs. In general, only 40% of the "guesstimates" provided have fallen within a mean +/- 25% range. Distribution of copies of individual patients' bills and of charge schedules failed to alter accuracy rates. With cost issues to dominant in today's health field, further study of derivative issues is important.

DSM IV defines its atypical features depression modifier mainly by current symptoms. Relative to depressed patients with melancholic features, those with atypical features often present with earlier onset of a more chronic disorder and are less likely to benefit from tricyclic antidepressant (TCA). We, therefore, hypothesized that within depressed patients with atypical features those with illness course most similar to that of melancholia would be most TCA-responsive, those whose illness course least resembled that of melancholia would be least TCA responsive. Two patient groups were treated with TCA, monoamine oxidase inhibitor, or placebo with nonresponders crossed to alternative treatment. One group met DSM IV criteria for atypical features and the other nearly met these criteria. Early onset, chronically depressed patients with DSM IV atypical features had poor TCA response relative to others. Patients with "probable" atypical features (mood reactivity plus one associated atypical feature) and nonresponders crossed to alternate treatment confirmed this. Findings suggest that application of DSM IV atypical features might best be limited to those with early onset of chronic dysphoria.

Large-scale reviews of research in deinstitutionalization and community living were last conducted about 10 years ago. Here we surveyed research from 1997 to 2007. Articles were included if the researchers based the study on original research, provided information on the participants and methodology, compared residential arrangements for adults with intellectual disability, and were published in English-language peer-reviewed journals. Sixty-eight articles were found. In 7 of 10 domains, the majority of studies show that community-based services are superior to congregate arrangements. These studies provide more evidence of the benefits of deinstitutionalization and community living and continue to indicate variability in results, suggesting that factors other than the basic model of care are important in determining outcomes.

CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that there was strong evidence to suggest that pulsed electromagnetic energy had a positive effect on the rate of wound healing. Methodological flaws in all the included trials suggest this conclusion is over-optimistic and should be interpreted with caution.
The goal of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of 1-, 3-, and 8-mg per day doses of buprenorphine in the maintenance treatment of opium-dependent patients over a 6-month treatment period. Participants were 513 opium-dependent individuals who were seeking treatment in an urban outpatient clinic, offering a 1-hr weekly individual counseling session. Overall, 305 patients (59.5%) completed the 6-month study. Completion rates by dosage group were 33.9% for the 1-mg dose group, 64.3% for the 3-mg dose group, and 80.1% for the 8-mg dose group-each significantly different from the other two groups. The results support the efficacy and safety of buprenorphine for outpatient treatment of opium dependence and seem to indicate that the highest dose (8 mg) of buprenorphine was the best of the three doses for Iranian opium-dependent patients to increase their retention in treatment.

In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study comparing teicoplanin and vancomycin for the treatment of gram-positive bacteremias in neutropenic patients, teicoplanin was given at 6 mg/kg of body weight every 24 h intravenously (i.v.) after initial loading every 12 h for three doses, while vancomycin was administered at 15 mg/kg every 12 h i.v. At enrollment, both groups were comparable in age, sex, underlying hematologic or neoplastic disorder, baseline renal functions, and incidence of neutropenia. Treatment was successful in 19 (90%) of 21 patients who received teicoplanin and 24 (96%) of 25 who received vancomycin (P = .58). Adverse reactions occurred more often in the vancomycin group (31%) than in the teicoplanin group (9%; P = .06) and were primarily cutaneous or gastrointestinal. In conclusion, teicoplanin was better tolerated than vancomycin, and no statistically significant difference in efficacy was detected with the sample size in this study.
Seventy-four immunocompromised patients with severe infection due to gram-positive organisms were randomized to receive either vancomycin or teicoplanin. Extensive cancer was present in 71 patients, of whom 47 died within a month. The types of infections were 46 bacteremias (39 associated with central catheters), 24 skin and soft tissue infections (3 with bacteremia), and 7 others (mainly bronchopneumonia). The most frequent pathogen was Staphylococcus epidermidis, followed by Staphylococcus aureus. Microbiological eradication was obtained in 23 of 35 evaluable patients treated with vancomycin (65.7%) and 28 of 36 patients treated with teicoplanin (77.8%) (P = 0.4). Clinical cure and improvement were obtained in 26 of 35 patients (74.3%) and 27 of 36 patients (75.0%), respectively. No significant side effects were observed with teicoplanin, in contrast to reversible increases in serum creatinine (three patients) and skin rashes (four patients) with vancomycin. Superinfection was observed in five patients treated with vancomycin and two patients treated with teicoplanin. No relation was found between peak concentration in serum (at steady state) or bactericidal titers and outcome.
Patients with blood cultures positive for gram-positive cocci were enrolled in a prospective randomized double-blind comparative trial of vancomycin at 15 mg/kg every 12 h versus teicoplanin at 6 mg/kg every 12 h for three doses and then 6 mg/kg every 24 h. A total of 54 patients were randomized, and 40 were evaluable. Of the 40, 9 had infection of indwelling vascular catheters. Four infections were due to Staphylococcus aureus, and five were due to Staphylococcus epidermidis. In concert with catheter removal, all patients were treated successfully, regardless of which drug they were taking. Of 31 patients without an indwelling catheter, 19 were infected with S. aureus, and 12 of the 19 had either endocarditis or mycotic aneurysm. Six of eight patients given teicoplanin failed treatment, as opposed to one of four patients given vancomycin (P = 0.14). Of greater concern, four of four patients with left-sided endocarditis or mycotic aneurysm failed to recover when given teicoplanin, as opposed to one of three patients given vancomycin (P = 0.07). Although not quite statistically significant, the unexpectedly high number of treatment failures with teicoplanin resulted in a decision to discontinue patient enrollment. It is suggested that future trials explore the efficacy of larger doses of teicoplanin.
OBJECTIVE: Increased RANTES expression has been described to have a role in atherosclerosis plaque formation. Functional polymorphisms within RANTES promoter region have shown association with increased risk of coronary atherosclerosis (CAD). The aim of this study was to examine the RANTES mRNA expression in patients with CAD compared to patients without CAD and its association with RANTES -403 G/A polymorphism in an Iranian population.
METHODS: The study was performed on 319 patients who underwent coronary artery angiography and patients with >50% stenosis in vessels considered as case groups (CAD+) N=191 and normal vessels group as control (CAD-) N=128. In each group 20 patients were examined for RANTES mRNA expression. RANTES mRNA expression was examined using quantitative real-time PCR. Genotyping of -403 polymorphism was performed using PCR-RFLP technique.
RESULTS: We found that RANTES mRNA expression was increased to 1.37 fold in CAD patients compared to the controls but the difference was not statistically significant. Also comparing the RANTES mRNA expression in patients with different RANTES -403 G/A polymorphism showed that in patients carrying AA genotype RANTES mRNA expression was increased to 1.74 fold compared to patients carrying GG genotype and to 1.51 fold compared to patients carrying GA genotype. No significant difference for allele and genotype frequencies of RANTES -403 polymorphism was found between cases and controls.
CONCLUSION: More studies on larger number of samples are required to further evaluate role of RANTES in pathogenesis of CAD.

BACKGROUND: Pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) is a high-molecular-weight, zinc-binding matrix metalloproteinase that is known to be abundantly expressed in ruptured plaques. Previous studies have shown PAPP-A to be a significant marker of plaque instability and cardiovascular events in patients with acute coronary syndromes. Because the activity of PAPP-A may be modulated by genetic variants in the PAPP-A genes, we tried to determine the association of PAPP-A gene with acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
METHODS: We analyzed four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PAPP-A gene variants and seven other polymorphisms of cytokine genes that have been reported to have functional significance (RANTES G-403A, MCP1 G-2518A, CRP A2147G, CRP G-717A, AGER G557A, LTA T26A, IL-6 G-572C) for possible association with AMI in 170 unrelated AMI patients and unrelated age-matched controls, respectively.
RESULTS: The average age of the study population was 62.2+/-11.4 years in AMI patients and 62.6+/-10.4 years in healthy controls. Multiple logistic regression analysis with risk factors such as age, male sex, smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia revealed the PAPP-A IVS6+95 C allele to be associated with an increased risk of AMI (dominancy: odds ratio, 2.13; 95% confidence interval, 1.12-4.07; P=0.022; codominancy: odds ratio, 1.89; 95% confidence interval, 1.14-3.16; P=0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: We found, for the first time, that PAPP-A IVS6+95 C allele is an independent risk factor for AMI even after adjustment for traditional risk factors. The determination of such genotype contributing to AMI could provide a new tool for identifying high-risk individuals.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that most lipid-modifying monotherapies showed an approximate one-to-one relationship between the lowering of non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and coronary heart disease. There were multiple shortcomings, but a very large number of patients in randomised trials were included. The authors' conclusions may be reliable, but confirmation with individual patient data is required.
In a double-blind study, prevention of re-thrombosis was tested on 101 patients in whom stenosis or segmental occlusion of a large artery of the lower limbs had been successfully removed by the intraluminal catheter method. The combination of 75 mg dipyridamol and 330 mg acetylsalicylic acid, three times daily by mouth, proved to be slightly more effective than acetylsalicylic acid alone at the same dosage. In the group with the combined treatment 84% of the arteries remained open, compared with 70% on acetylsalicylic acid alone.

Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of aortoiliac and femoropopliteal atherosclerotic lesions can provide long-lasting hemodynamic improvement. High-dose aspirin is commonly prescribed as reocclusion prophylaxis, but low doses would be preferable because of fewer adverse effects. We performed a double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial in patients with peripheral vascular disease with lesions appropriate for angioplasty. We compared the efficacy and side effects of two doses of aspirin (50 mg vs. 900 mg daily) during a period of 12 months after angioplasty. A total of 359 patients were evaluated: 175 were randomly assigned to treatment with 900 mg aspirin daily and 184 to 50 mg aspirin daily. Thirty-nine patients developed restenosis at the angioplasty site; the cumulative percentage of event-free survival after 1 year (patency rate) was 85% in 900 mg group and 84% in 50 mg group. An equivalence test showed the two groups equivalent with respect to restenosis rates (P = 0.0003 for an equivalence region of < 10% difference. Nine patients (5%) in the 900 mg group had serious gastrointestinal side effects (peptic ulcer, 8; erosive gastritis requiring transfusion, 1) compared to two ( peptic ulcer) in the 50 mg group (P = 0.03). The results of our study show that a dose of 50 mg aspirin a day is as effective as 900 mg for the prevention of restenoses after lower limb angioplasty, and that severe gastrointestinal side effects are less frequent.

Titers of antibodies to infecting dengue virus serotypes determined by serum neutralization assay were higher than those of antibody to Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus in Japanese dengue patients after disease day 8. Titers of antibody to dengue virus antigens determined by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay were higher in only 1 of 23 serum specimens after disease day 11. Thus, the neutralization test is more reliable than the HI test for serological diagnosis of dengue in countries where JE vaccination is widely used or JE is endemic.

To date, the biological significance of breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) G34A and C421A polymorphisms is largely unknown. Analysis of these two polymorphisms in 156 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients and 376 control subjects revealed an increased risk of DLBCL associated with variant BCRP 421 genotypes (CA and AA), when compared with the wild-type CC genotype [odds ratio = 1.49, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.02-2.17, P = 0.042]. Moreover, the increased risk was more evident in younger patients (<or=50 years, odds ratio = 2.14, 95% CI 1.25-3.68, P = 0.006). Further evaluation for the association of these polymorphisms with overall survival of DLBCL showed that patients with 34AA alleles displayed worse survival compared with those carrying GG/GA genotypes [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.69, 95% CI 1.56-8.71, P = 0.001]. Significant association between 421CC genotypes and poorer survival of DLBCL was observed in patients younger at diagnosis (<or=50 years, HR = 5.80, 95% CI 1.16-28.90, P = 0.015) or with bulky tumor (HR = 4.36, 95% CI 1.04-18.31, P = 0.027). Furthermore, we found the combined effects of BCRP G34A and C421A on the overall survival. Compared with patients carrying BCRP 34(GG + GA)421(AA + CA) genotype, the individual with 34AA421CC displayed the worst survival (HR = 7.55, 95% CI 2.36-24.17, P = 0.001), while those with 34(GG + GA)421CC and 34AA421(AA + CA) combinations showed the intermediate survival. These results suggest that the BCRP G34A and C421A polymorphisms are associated with the risk and survival of DLBCL. Our finding warrants further investigations on the association of BCRP polymorphisms with susceptibility and clinical outcome of cancer.

CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review assessed the effects of population level tobacco control interventions on smoking related health inequalities. The authors concluded that these interventions have the potential to reduce health inequalities for disadvantaged groups. A need for further rigorous research in a number of specific areas was identified. Given the level of evidence presented, the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the impact of an urban regeneration project on mental health.
METHOD: A longitudinal study was made with 22-month follow-up in a Single Regeneration Budget area, and matched control area in South Manchester. A total of 1344 subjects responded to a postal questionnaire survey. The main outcome measures were GHQ12 (mental health) status, MANSA (Life satisfaction), and GP use.
RESULTS: Mental health outcome in the index and control areas showed no improvement over time. Health satisfaction declined slightly in the index compared to the control area. GP use was unchanged. Restricted opportunities, a variable closely related to mental health, were not removed by the urban regeneration initiative.
CONCLUSIONS: The urban regeneration initiative may have had little impact because it failed to address the concerns of local residents and failed to remove restricted opportunities, which appeared to be the key factor. A longer follow-up period may be required to demonstrate an effect.

Comprehensive intervention for homeless, street living youth that addresses substance use, social stability, physical and mental health issues has received very little attention. In this study, street living youth aged 14-22 were recruited from a drop-in center and randomly assigned to the Community Reinforcement Approach (CRA) or treatment as usual (TAU) through a drop-in center. Findings showed that youth assigned to CRA, compared to TAU, reported significantly reduced substance use (37% vs. 17% reduction), depression (40% vs. 23%) and increased social stability (58% vs. 13%). Youth in both conditions improved in many other behavioral domains including substance use, internalizing and externalizing problems, and emotion and task oriented coping. This study indicates that homeless youth can be engaged into treatment and respond favorably to intervention efforts. However, more treatment development research is needed to address the barriers associated with serving these youth.

Treatment evaluation for alcohol problem, runaway adolescents and their families is rare. This study recruited primary alcohol problem adolescents (N = 119) and their primary caretakers from two runaway shelters and assigned them to (a) home-based ecologically based family therapy (EBFT), (b) office-based functional family therapy (FFT), or (c) service as usual (SAU) through the shelter. Findings showed that both home-based EBFT and office-based FFT significantly reduced alcohol and drug use compared with SAU at 15-month postbaseline. Measures of family and adolescent functioning improved over time in all groups. However, significant differences among the home- and office-based interventions were found for treatment engagement and moderators of outcome.

HIV infection is associated with subnormal GSH levels. An increase in glutathione levels has been observed in HIV-infected adults under oral whey protein supplementation. We studied the features associated with a whey protein concentrate supplementation in children with rapidly progressive AIDS. A prospective double-blind clinical trial was carried out for 4 months with 18 vertically HIV-infected children (1.98-6.37 years), under antiretroviral therapy, who had received whey protein, maltodextrin (placebo) or none. Erythrocyte glutathione concentration, T lymphocyte counts (CD4+ and CD8+) and occurrence of associated co-infections were evaluated. Wilcoxon's and Fischer's Exact tests were used to assess differences between whey protein-supplemented and control (placebo and non-supplemented) groups. A significant median increase of 16.14 mg/dl (p = 0.018) in erythrocyte glutathione levels was observed in the whey protein-supplemented group; the TCD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio showed a non significant increase and lower occurrence of associated co-infections was also observed. In conclusion, whey protein concentrate supplementation can stimulate glutathione synthesis and, possibly, decrease the occurrence of associated co-infections.

Social-ecological (SE) models are becoming more widely used in health behavior research. Applying SE models to the design of interventions is challenging because models must be tailor-made for each behavior and population, other theories need to be integrated into multi-level frameworks, and empirical research to guide model development is limited. The purpose of the present paper is to describe a SE framework that guided the intervention and measurement plans for a specific study. The trial of activity for adolescent girls (TAAG) is a multi-center study of interventions to reduce the decline of physical activity in adolescent girls. The TAAG framework incorporates operant learning theory, social cognitive theory, organizational change theory and the diffusion of innovation model in a multi-level model. The explicit and practical model developed for TAAG has already benefited the study and may have elements that can generalize to other health promotion studies.

The impact of breast cancer on the emotional and social health of women and their families is an important issue for the cancer field. Nevertheless, many patients do not avail themselves of support programmes. In rural communities there is often a lack of services, which, for many, leads to a perception of 'being alone' in the struggle to become better. This paper reports an evaluation of a pilot project to facilitate a self-help peer support group network: an extensive provincial audio teleconferencing network for rural breast cancer survivors, established by the Telemedicine Centre of the Memorial University of Newfoundland. A satisfaction questionnaire was distributed to participants in the pilot programme. Responses suggested that they were very satisfied with the use of audio teleconferencing for the facilitation of a social support programme. The programme appeared to help bridge the isolation gap that rural women with breast cancer often experience. The results have implications for the provision of self-help social support services through audio teleconferencing, as well as for the quality of life and wellbeing of rural women.

This study examined the effects of integrating mental health, substance abuse, and housing interventions for homeless persons with co-occurring severe mental illness and substance use disorder. With the use of a quasi-experimental design, integrated treatment was compared with standard treatment for 217 homeless, dually diagnosed adults over an 18-month period. The integrated treatment group had fewer institutional days and more days in stable housing, made more progress toward recovery from substance abuse, and showed greater improvement of alcohol use disorders than the standard treatment group. Abuse of drugs other than alcohol (primarily cocaine) improved similarly for both groups. Secondary outcomes, such as psychiatric symptoms, functional status, and quality of life, also improved for both groups, with minimal group differences favoring integrated treatment.

Substance misuse is common in early psychosis, and impacts negatively on outcomes. Little is known about effective interventions for this population. We report a pilot study of brief intervention for substance misuse in early psychosis (Start Over and Survive: SOS), comparing it with Standard Care (SC). Twenty-five in-patients aged 18-35 years with early psychosis and current misuse of non-opioid drugs were allocated randomly to conditions. Substance use and related problems were assessed at baseline, 6 weeks and 3, 6 and 12 months. Final assessments were blind to condition. All 13 SOS participants who proceeded to motivational interviewing reported less substance use at 6 months, compared with 58% (7/12) in SC alone. Effects were well maintained to 12 months. However, more SOS participants lived with a relative or partner, and this also was associated with better outcomes. Engagement remained challenging: 39% (16/41) declined participation and 38% (5/13) in SOS only received rapport building. Further research will increase sample size, and address both engagement and potential confounds.

To address the need for nonpharmacologic approaches to managing difficult behaviors in patients with dementia, a repeated measures design was used to test the effectiveness of educational and behavioral intervention on behavioral and functional outcomes in home-dwelling patients with dementia and their caregivers' knowledge of dementia. Baseline and 6-month postintervention data were collected for 108 subjects (54 caregiver/patient pairs) following random assignment to an intervention or comparison group. Findings included increases in caregiver knowledge in two treatment groups and patient self-care ability in one treatment group and ratings of the most effective behavioral interventions by caregivers.

This paper is intended to describe the expert system RHINOS for diagnosing patients whose chief complaints are headache and facial pain. RHINOS assists physicians in diagnosing the above-mentioned disease. For this purpose the authors surveyed diagnosing processes used by physicians to determine what advice physicians want. As a result, the author reached the conclusion that knowledge for diagnosing the above-mentioned disease should be categorized according to four types of rules: exclusive rules (if the patient has disease D, he must have symptoms S1, S2,....,Sn), inclusive rules (if the patient has symptoms S1, S2,...,Sn, he has disease D with a probability X (0 less than X less than 1)), associate rules (if the patient has symptoms S1, S2,...,Sn the probability that he has the disease D increases) and disease image (if the patient has disease D, he may have symptoms S1, S2,...,Sn). Through harmonious use of these four types of rules, RHINOS gives the advise that physicians want. RHINOS is widely available because it is implemented by Prolog-KABA which is operative on personal computers such as NEC PC9801 and IBM-PC.

Magnesium sulphate has been established as the drug of choice in the management of eclampsia and even when used in cases of severe pre-eclampsia it is given infrequently. It is recognised to have potentially severe toxic effects but there is a need to achieve therapeutic levels quickly enough to prevent seizures. This paper reports an audit following the introduction of a protocol for the use of magnesium sulphate in eclampsia and severe pre-eclampsia at Ninewells hospital, Dundee. Problems were identified with both the time taken to reach therapeutic levels and clinical monitoring of magnesium levels despite the use of loading doses commonly recommended. Reaudit after changes to the protocol and the introduction of an administration/monitoring chart showed a significant improvement in both monitoring and the adequacy of prophylaxis. This demonstrates how audit of clinical practice has been used to improve clinical effectiveness in an area in which a potentially toxic drug is used infrequently but with potentially life saving benefits.

In an attempt to address the low compliance with offers of treatment shown by patients after episodes of non-fatal deliberate self-harm (DSH), patients who had harmed themselves for the first time were offered rapid, easy access to on-call trainee psychiatrists in the event of further difficulties, and they were encouraged to seek help at an early stage should such problems arise. The follow-up data obtained after one year showed a significant reduction of actual or seriously threatened DSH in the experimental group, who also made considerably less demands on medical and psychiatric services, when compared with controls.

A national survey conducted in 1995 found that a disturbingly high percentage of Americans do not understand the basic elements of health plans and that people want much more information, particularly about the physicians in the plans and the range of services that are covered. Their most important concern when selecting a health plan is the quality of physicians in the plan, followed by the courtesy of doctors and staff and the freedom to choose their own doctors and hospitals.

To what degree do or should marketing and nursing overlap? If marketing is about meeting patient needs, who better than the nursing staff to inform marketing decisions? Meeting patient needs profitably ensures that patient care can continue to move toward excellence. As competition continues to intensify and reimbursement remains insufficient, using all of the healthcare system's available intellectual capital is imperative to achieving maximum competitive advantage. The author applies current marketing theory to the healthcare environment and provides practical suggestions on how nursing administrators and staff can work collaboratively with marketing colleagues to develop and implement strategic marketing programs. This is the first in a series of 3 articles, which will move readers from broad marketing strategy to specific applications. The second (June, 2002) and third articles (July/August, 2002) will focus on internal marketing and using professional certification as a marketing tool.

Patients admitted for therapy of active rheumatoid arthritis were prospectively followed throughout their hospital stay. Average length of stay was 17.1 days. Serial global assessments, whether determined by rheumatologist, physiotherapist or patient appeared to improve linearly until at least hospital day 21. From admission to discharge, mean global assessment scores improved by about one third. Poor global assessment, high disability index, and the presence of comorbid disease and anemia on admission, as well as admission late in the week, were predictive of prolonged hospital stay.

Several randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials have demonstrated that megestrol acetate therapy can result in appetite stimulation and nonfluid weight gain in patients with cancer anorexia/cachexia. The present trial was designed to compare megestrol acetate doses ranging from 160 to 1,280 mg/day. day. This trial randomly assigned 342 evaluable patients with cancer anorexia/cachexia to receive oral megestrol acetate at doses of 160, 480, 800 and 1,280 mg/day. Patients were evaluated monthly by history, examination and patient-completed questionnaires, as well as by serum albumin levels. The data demonstrate a positive dose-response effect for megestrol acetate on appetite stimulation (p = 0.02). there was a trend for more nonfluid weight gain with higher drug doses. Megestrol acetate was well tolerated in this group of patients with advanced malignant disease. The positive dose-response effect observed for megestrol acetate on appetite stimulation supports both the prestudy hypothesis and findings in the literature. The optimal dose in this study seemed to be 800 mg/day; no further benefit was derived from using the higher dose. Nonetheless, it may be reasonable to start with lower initial doses in routine clinical practice, taking into account dosage form, availability and cost of therapy.
Reduced food intake is probably the major cause of continuing weight loss in cancer patients. Therefore, agents which stimulate food intake may be of significant benefit to such patients. To examine this, a randomized double-blind placebo controlled study of megestrol acetate was carried out. 38 gastrointestinal cancer patients with weight loss (8-43% of pre-illness stable weight) were entered into the study. 26 were evaluable at 6 weeks and 21 at 12 weeks. Clinical details, serum biochemistry and haematology were examined at 6 and 12 weeks and total body water, total body potassium at 12 weeks after the baseline assessment. There was no significant weight change in either group over the 6 or 12 weeks. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in total body water, total body potassium, blood biochemistry or haematology between the groups over the study period. It does not appear that megestrol acetate at a dose of 480 mg/day results in weight gain in advanced gastrointestinal cancer patients with weight loss.
Reporting on an experimental field study of computer use by general practitioners during consultations, this paper focuses particularly on the experiences of the doctors in their efforts to communicate concurrently with a patient and a computer. Through the analysis of logs of computer use, video recordings of consultations and interviews with doctors, the authors report on the uptake of the computer facilities, the impact of such use on information handling during the consultation, the doctors' views about using the system, and finally the relationship between doctors' ;natural' consulting styles and their uptake and views of the system.
Preliminary information has suggested that megestrol acetate leads to appetite stimulation and nonfluid weight gain in patients with breast cancer, other cancers, and AIDS. Pursuant to this, we developed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of megestrol acetate in patients with cancer-associated anorexia and cachexia. We randomly assigned 133 eligible patients to receive 800 mg of megestrol acetate per day or a placebo. Patients assigned to megestrol acetate more frequently reported improved appetite (P = .003) and food intake (P = .009) when compared with patients receiving the placebo. A weight gain of 15 lb or more over baseline was seen in 11 of 67 (16%) patients receiving megestrol acetate compared with one of 66 (2%) given the placebo (P = .003). Patients receiving megestrol acetate reported significantly less nausea (13% vs. 38%; P = .001) and emesis (8% vs. 25%, P = .009). No clinically or statistically significant toxic reactions were ascribed to megestrol acetate, with the exception of mild edema. This study convincingly demonstrated that megestrol acetate can stimulate appetite and food intake in patients with anorexia and cachexia associated with cancer, leading to significant weight gain in a proportion of such patients.
We attempted to measure cardiopulmonary effects, CD4 counts, and perceived sense of well-being in 25 individuals moderately to severely immunocompromised from HIV infection (mean entry CD4 count = 144.microliters-1) before and after a 24-wk program of exercise training. Only six subjects completed the 24-wk program. All six showed evidence of a training effect. Statistically significant improvements were seen in maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max), oxygen pulse, and minute ventilation. Submaximal exercise performance improved significantly by 12 wk in the 10 individuals available for testing: decreases were seen in heart rate, rate pressure product, and rate of perceived exertion. White blood cell counts and T-lymphocyte subsets were stable at 12 and 24 wk in the subjects available for testing. High depression/anxiety scores on a mental health inventory (General Health Questionnaire) correlated with low CD4 counts. Scores did not correlate with compliance with the exercise program. There was a trend (P < 0.10) for scores to improve over time among those individuals who attended > or = 80% of scheduled exercise sessions. We conclude that exercise training is feasible and beneficial for some HIV-infected individuals.
The safety and efficacy of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim in the prevention of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) were evaluated. Sixty patients with a new diagnosis of Kaposi's sarcoma and no history of opportunistic infections were randomly assigned to receive 800 mg of sulfamethoxazole and 160 mg of trimethoprim twice per day or no therapy. None of the 30 patients receiving sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim developed P carinii pneumonia. Sixteen of the 30 patients receiving no suppressive therapy developed P carinii pneumonia. Development of P carinii pneumonia was associated with the stage of Kaposi's sarcoma, B subtype disease, and the presence of 0.20 X 10(9)/L (200/mm3) or fewer CD4 cells at study entry. The proportion of patients surviving and the mean length of survival were significantly greater in the treatment group compared with the control group. Adverse reactions occurred in 15 patients (50%).
Variceal recurrence and rebleeding are common after initial obliteration by injection sclerotherapy. To investigate whether propranolol can maintain variceal obliteration by sclerotherapy, 59 patients with oesophageal variceal bleeding after sclerotherapy were enrolled. Patients were allocated to propranolol treatment (30 patients) or served as controls (29 patients). After a mean follow up of 2 years and 4 months, 53 patients completed the study. Fifty-eight per cent of the propranolol group versus 77% of the control group experienced recurrent varices (P = 0.20). Fifteen per cent of the propranolol group versus 11% of the control group developed cardiac varices. Recurrent variceal bleeding was encountered in 27% of the propranolol group and 19% of the control group. Three patients in the propranolol group, compared with two patients in the control group, died of massive variceal bleeding. Eighty per cent of them bled from cardiac varices. Both groups had similar survival rates. We therefore concluded that the use of propranolol after variceal obliteration by sclerotherapy can neither prevent oesophagogastric variceal recurrence nor prevent further rebleeding.
Forty-one patients admitted with first episode of bleeding from esophageal varices were enrolled in a trial of the efficacy of oral propranolol to prevent rebleeding during the course of endoscopic sclerotherapy until obliteration. Single-blind randomization to sclerotherapy alone or with propranolol was used. At monthly endoscopy the varices were injected with 1% Aethoxysclerol until obliteration. If bleeding recurred, additional sclerotherapy was given. There was no intergroup difference in time to eradication of varices (8.1 vs. 7.7 months). The cumulative number of bleedings from varices and from distal esophageal ulcerations was identical in the two study groups. Five patients in the control group but only one in the propranolol group died of bleeding in the study period, a difference of only borderline significance (chi 2 = 4.08, df = 1). There were no specific side effects of propranolol. Thus propranolol did not significantly reduce the frequency of rebleeding until variceal obliteration, but could have had some influence on the gravity of rebleeding.
In 29 patients admitted with their first bleeding episode from oesophageal varices the varices were obliterated within 6 months by treatment with serial endoscopic sclerotherapy and propranolol or with sclerotherapy only. The patients were checked regularly during 18 months after the varices had been obliterated. Variceal recurrence was found in 11 patients (73%; 95% confidence limits, 45-92%) treated with sclerotherapy only and in 2 patients (15%; 95% confidence limits, 2-43%; p less than 0.01) treated with sclerotherapy and propranolol. In nine patients (69%) with recurrence significant variceal bleeding occurred. All recurrences were observed within 12 months after the initial obliteration. Variceal recurrence occurred in 3 Child A patients and in 10 Child B or C patients. All bleeding occurred in Child B or C patients. It is concluded that obliteration of oesophageal varices by endoscopic sclerotherapy and propranolol may be more effective in the long-term control of variceal recurrence than treatment with sclerotherapy only.
Thirty-one patients admitted with the first bleeding episode from oesophageal varices were randomized in a double-blind manner to receive oral propranolol, 160 mg daily, for 6 months (n = 15) or matching placebo (n = 16) for the same period. Endoscopy was performed each month during the 6 months and additionally after a further 3 months. The oesophageal varices were injected paravariceally with 2% aethoxysclerol until obliteration. If rebleeding occurred, additional sclerotherapy was performed. In the group treated with sclerotherapy and propranolol 3 patients rebled (20%; 95% confidence limits, 4%-48%), whereas 12 patients treated with sclerotherapy and placebo rebled (75%; 95% confidence limits, 48%-93%; p less than 0.05). There were no side effects to treatment in either of the groups, and it is concluded that administration of propranolol reduces the frequency of variceal rebleeding before variceal obliteration during a course of endoscopic sclerotherapy.
In a prospective, randomized controlled trial, 53 patients with variceal hemorrhage from portal hypertension, including 44 with cirrhosis, were allocated, after initial control of the bleeding, to treatment by sclerotherapy alone, or by this together with oral propranolol in a dose sufficient to reduce resting pulse rate by 25% during the period up to the time when varices were obliterated. Eight of the 27 patients undergoing sclerotherapy alone rebled during this period as compared to 7 of the 26 patients in the additional propranolol group (p greater than 0.80), two patients from each group dying from uncontrollable variceal hemorrhage. Propranolol precipitated encephalopathy in one patient and complicated resuscitation following bleeding in a second, and as there was no evidence in this study that use of the drug reduced the frequency or severity of the variceal bleeding, its administration cannot be recommended during the period prior to obliteration of varices by sclerotherapy.
A randomized clinical trial of once-weekly antenatal fetal heart rate monitoring in 539 high-risk patients could find no benefit of monitoring in terms of perinatal mortality, morbidity or Apgar score. The previously well-documented association between abnormal antenatal fetal heart rate traces and low Apgar score was confirmed. A detailed case review showed that in this population monitoring was irrelevant to almost all of the 13 perinatal deaths.
We studied the efficacy of adenoidectomy in 213 children who had received tympanostomy-tube placement because of persistent and/or recurrent otitis media and had again developed otitis media after tubal extrusion. Ninety-nine of the children were assigned randomly to either an adenoidectomy group or a control group; in a separate trial, 114 children whose parents withheld consent for randomization were assigned according to parental preference. In both trials, control group outcomes appeared to have been biased favorably by the withdrawal of certain severely affected subjects from control status to receive adenoidectomy. Nonetheless, in both trials, adenoidectomy group outcomes were more favorable than control group outcomes during the first 2 follow-up years. Statistically significant differences were found mainly in the randomized trial, where during the first and second years, respectively, adenoidectomy subjects had 47% and 37% less time with otitis media than control subjects and 28% and 35% fewer suppurative (acute) episodes than control subjects. We conclude that adenoidectomy is warranted on an individualized basis for children who develop recurrent otitis media after extrusion of tympanostomy tubes.
150 children aged between 2 and 9 years (mean 5.25 years) with chronic bilateral otitis media with effusion were randomly allocated to three groups who, in addition to unilateral myringotomy and grommet insertion, would have an adenotonsillectomy, an adenoidectomy, or neither. The contralateral ear was assessed. Otoscopic, impedance, and audiometric findings were recorded preoperatively and at six and twelve months postoperatively. Subtraction of the no-surgery results indicates that at twelve months adenoidectomy produces otoscopic resolution of OME in 41.7% and no-peak/peak conversion of impedance in 29.8%. The hearing gain from adenoidectomy alone was similar to that resulting from insertion of a grommet alone, but the children having adenoidectomy required fewer reinsertions to maintain adequate subjective hearing thresholds in the treated ear (26% versus 54%). Tonsillectomy conferred no additional benefit. Without treatment there was a small but significant improvement in all indices at twelve months but not at six months postoperatively.
Repeated tympanometric screening of a regionally defined population of 3-year-old children defined a group of 42 children with middle ear disease which had persisted for at least 6 months. These children were treated by either myringotomy with adenoidectomy or myringotomy without adenoidectomy decided by random allocation. Postoperative observation during 6 months failed to disclose any difference in middle ear status between the two groups.
This random controlled study was undertaken to determine the extent to which nonsurgical treatment can control otitis media with effusion (OME); and if surgical treatment is indicated, and myringotomy, removal of middle ear liquid with insertion of aeration tubes is carried out, and whether removal of the adenoids produces any beneficial effect. A preparatory two-month nonsurgical treatment consisting of measures to improve the functional state of the nose was undertaken to eliminate from the study those children (42%) who would respond to medical treatment alone. The cure rate was similar in each of the operation groups with a greater relapse rate in the nonadenoidectomy groups who required 9% more aeration tube insertions. An estimation from x-rays of the size of the adenoids, shows that the group cured without surgery has a tendency towards the smaller adneoids. The relapse rate in the nonadenoidectomy group was independent of the size of the adenoids, and the study failed to show that any benefit accrued though adenoidectomy. Accordingly, the removal of adenoids should cease to be indicated in cases of OME as a primary form of treatment.
A prospective controlled study was made on the effect of adenoidectomy performed on 105 children. For various reasons, mainly severe long-standing nasal obstruction, 29 children were omitted from the study. The remaining 76 children were randomly divided into two groups, one adenoidectomy, and one control. Both groups were slightly reduced in number due to drop out. Thus 36 adenoidectomized children were followed during one year and 35 children during two years. The corresponding numbers for the children in the control group were 37 and 33. The incidence of common cold, purulent and serous otitis media and moderate nasal obstruction was compared in the two groups. A considerable reduction in the incidence of these variables was observed in both groups. The occurrence of moderate nasal obstruction was reduced more among the operated than among the unoperated children. The difference was only slightly significant during the first and not at all during the second year. Regarding the other variables, the differences were not significant, implying that adenoidectomy seems to have no effect on the incidence of common cold, serous and purulent otitis media.
The use of benzydamine hydrochloride pump spray as a post-operative analgesic in children undergoing tonsillectomy was assessed in a double-blind trial in 56 subjects of ages ranging from 4-11 years. The raw tonsil bed was sprayed before the childrens' mealtimes and the appraisal of post-operative pain was made on the soreness of the throat as assessed by child, parent and surgeon; also assessed were the degree of referred earache, the ability of the child to swallow without discomfort, and the macroscopic appearance of the healing tonsillar bed. Results showed that the benzydamine spray was more effective than placebo in the control of post-operative pain.
Twenty-four patients (9 M and 15 F, age range 51-82) with polymyalgia rheumatica receiving 6-methylprednisolone for a period of 9 months (16 mg/daily/two weeks, 14 mg/daily/two weeks, 12 mg/daily/1 month, 10 mg/daily/1 month, 8 mg/daily/1 month, 6 mg/daily/1 month and 4 mg/daily for the last four months) were randomly assigned to receive either 250HD3 (35 mcg/day for 25 days/month) (Group A) or placebo (Group B) in a double-blind study. All patients also received 500 mg elemental calcium daily. Before and at 3, 6 and 9 months ESR, tenderness on palpation and subjective pain were evaluated. At the same times, mineral metabolism parameters (serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, 24-h urinary calcium, phosphate and 24-h hydroxyproline excretion) and radial bone mineral content (BMC) were evaluated. Activity indexes (ESR and clinical parameters) improved in both groups. Furthermore, serum alkaline phosphatase and 24-h hydroxyproline excretion decreased significantly only in Group A, and BMC decreased significantly in Group B but rose slightly in Group A. No side effects were observed in any of the patients.
We evaluated the efficacy and side effects of immediate postcoital administration of levonorgestrel 0.75 mg used repeatedly for contraception. A total of 295 healthy women with infrequent coitus were enrolled at 6 study sites. Each woman took levonorgestrel 0.75 mg by mouth immediately after intercourse during 6 months as her only method of contraception. We collected data on side effects and acceptability and calculated the Pearl index failure rates over 133 woman-years of use by standard methods. The Pearl index failure rate was 6.8 (95% CI 3.1-12.9) pregnancies per 100 woman-years of use. The overall probability of pregnancy per treated coital act was 1.4 per 1000. Approximately one-third of participants discontinued the study within 6 months (mainly for bleeding problems). Menstrual complaints were reported by 70% of women. Other complaints included (in decreasing order) nausea, breast tenderness, weakness, dizziness, headache, abdominal bloating, loss of libido, depression, and vomiting. High-dose levonorgestrel pills are unsuitable for regular postcoital contraception.
Contraceptive efficacy, cycle control and side effects of two types of 0.75 mg levonorgestrel tablets taken postcoitally during the periovulatory period of one cycle were studied in a multicenter trial involving 361 women. No significant differences were found between the two types of levonorgestrel pills in terms of contraceptive efficacy, cycle control and side effects. The failure rate observed (1.4% per treated cycle) was similar to that reported for other hormonal approaches to emergency postcoital contraception. Intermenstrual bleeding or spotting occurred in 11.5% of the cycles and anovulation as assessed from BBT charts in 14.4% of cycles. One or more side effects were reported by 22.2% of subjects. The relatively frequent occurrence of cycle disturbances and subjective side effects make it unlikely that the repeated postcoital use of levonorgestrel would be an acceptable routine method of contraception for most women.
The contraceptive efficacy and side effects of postcoital levonorgestrel used repeatedly during the peri-ovulatory period of one cycle was examined in 259 women. All subjects were of proven fertility in their present union and had ovulatory cycles as assessed from pre-treatment BBT charts. The mean number of coital acts during the treatment cycle was 7.5 (SD:2.6) and the mean number of 0.75 mg levonorgestrel tablets taken during the peri-ovulatory period was 4.0 (SD:1.2). Two pregnancies, both considered to be method failures, occurred, giving a failure rate of 0.8% per treated cycle. Although the overall effect of levonorgestrel on menstrual cycle length was small and insignificant, menstrual cycle disturbances were not uncommon. Intermenstrual bleeding or spotting occurred in 8.5% of the treated cycles and 12.5% of the cycles were less than 20 or more than 35 days. Other side effects, mainly nausea, headache and dizziness, were reported by about 20% of the subjects but the apparent incidence of these complaints varied markedly between the nine participating centres from 0% to just over 50%. The data suggest that repeated postcoital use of levonorgestrel is probably not a viable approach to fertility regulation for the majority of women who have regular intercourse and wish to limit the number of their pregnancies.
Two hundred and ninety-eight women were followed for 2578 months (2739 'bleeding intervals') of treatment with d-Norgestrel 1.0 mg given as a post-coital oral contraceptive. Fourteen pregnancies were recorded (general failure rate, 6.5 per 100 woman/years); at least 6 of these patients did not miss any tablet (corrected failure rate, 2.8). The acceptability rates (life table method) were 0.58 and 0.40 after 6 and 12 months of follow-up. The most important medical reason for drop-out was cycle irregularities. The cycle pattern is deeply disturbed by this method of oral contraception.
Pelvic and aortic lymphadenectomy for gynecologic malignancies has changed from a random "picking" of some pelvic and aortic lymph nodes to a well-established technique based on adequate knowledge of the patterns of spread of the primary tumor. The identification of the node groups to remove, the number of nodes to count, and the border of dissection in the different clinical situations make pelvic and aortic lymphadenectomy a reproducible surgical intervention. The large experience accumulated over the years has greatly improved the technique and perioperative and complication management. The improved knowledge of the natural history of gynecologic tumors has refined the indications for lymph node dissection. Today, pelvic and aortic lymphadenectomy is primarily a staging procedure. The therapeutic value of lymphadenectomy is recognized in the surgical treatment of cervical cancer, but it is still under evaluation in ovarian and endometrial tumors.
Seventy-four children from three weeks to two years of age with various upper respiratory symptoms were randomly assigned to three groups: two intervention groups (saline nose drops; medicated nose drops) and a control group (no nose drops). Forty-six children returned for check-up two days later. Subjects in all three groups improved between first and second contact. There was no significant difference between the three groups. It is concluded that medicated nose drops are not essential in the treatment of upper respiratory infection and rhinitis.
Current therapy in Russia for long-term management of asthma is mainly non-steroidal. This provided the opportunity to compare the efficacy and safety of formoterol (Oxis) Turbuhaler plus budesonide (Pulmicort) Turbuhaler with budesonide Turbuhaler alone in adults (n=338) with mild to moderate asthma who had little previous exposure to inhaled corticosteroids. The 12-week study followed a randomised, double-blind, parallel group design and included an open control group of patients who were treated with conventional non-corticosteroid therapy. Patients treated with formoterol plus budesonide benefited from a significantly greater improvement in their pulmonary function and asthma symptoms compared with budesonide alone (95% Cl of difference in mean morning peak expiratory flow [PEF] 8.7-36.3 l/min, p=0.0015). Non-corticosteroid treatment was significantly less effective than formoterol plus budesonide and budesonide alone (95% CIs of differences in mean morning PEF were 36.4-63.6 l/min and 14.1-41.1 l/min, respectively, both p=0.0001). Although the incidence and frequency of adverse events was not significantly different between the groups, formoterol plus budesonide and budesonide alone were better tolerated than non-corticosteroid treatment, and there were fewer incidences of asthma deterioration. Overall, formoterol Turbuhaler plus budesonide Turbuhaler was the safest and most effective treatment.
Quantitative bone histology, biochemistry and height velocities were studied in 18 children suffering from chronic renal failure. Eight received calcitriol, 7 ergocalciferol and 3, though alloted to a treatment group, failed to comply with therapy. A histochemical stain for aluminum showed heavy deposition at the calcification front in 3 patients; 2, in the calcitriol group had severe osteomalacia which worsened during treatment, and 1 in the ergocalciferol group had osteomalacia which did not improve. One had never undergone hemodialysis. Bone histology improved markedly in the remaining 12 patients, whichever vitamin D preparation was used; it was unchanged in 3 non-compliant children. Plasma calcium levels rose while parathyroid hormone and alkaline phosphatase levels fell following both treatments, and were unchanged in non-compliant children. Hypercalcemia occurred more frequently following calcitriol therapy (11 episodes) than following ergocalciferol therapy (3 episodes). Height velocities, studied in 11 children, increased in 5 (3 on ergocalciferol and 2 on calcitriol) and were unchanged in 6 (1 on ergocalciferol, 5 on calcitriol). Improved bone histology did not correlate with increase in height velocity. As ergocalciferol and calcitriol had similar therapeutic effects and as side-effects were more common with calcitriol, it is concluded that calcitriol provides no advantage over ergocalciferol in the treatment of renal bone disease in children.
Serial measurements of 51Cr edetic acid clearance were made over a period of one year in two groups of 8 children, in a double blind trial of 1 alpha-hydroxycholecalciferol (10 ng/kg/day) and calciferol (670 ng/kg/day). Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) at the beginning of the trial was 20-50 ml/min/1.73 m2; it rose in the children given 1 alpha-hydroxycholecalciferol (group A) after 6 months but was not appreciably different from the pretreatment value after 12 months. The GFR in the children given calciferol (group B) showed no significant difference at 6 or 12 months. Parathyroid hormone values fell markedly in group A after 6 months but not in group B. Quantitative bone histology improved considerably in group A but not in group B at 12 months. Low dose 1 alpha-hydroxycholecalciferol may be used effectively for renal osteodystrophy in children with moderate but stable renal failure without jeopardising renal function.
BACKGROUND: The Modern oncological treatment usually consists of the different kind of the therapies. Improvement of survival and local control of disease could be possible with combined treatments: surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, etc. However if these treatments are given concomitantly one can expect higher toxicity. AIM: Comparation of parameters of miclotoxicity: red blood cell count, white blood cell count, platelets and hemoglobin in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma treated with concomitant chemo-radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone. PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 1997-1999, we performed prospective, by randomised, study, and 80 patients were divided in two groups: Group A--40 patients treated with concomitant chemo-radiotherapy versus, Group B--40 patients treated with radiotherapy alone. Red blood cell count, white blood cell count, platelets and hemoglobin were evaluated before enrollement, during the theraphy, after 3 and 6 months, according to CTC toxicity criteria. RESULTS: We perform statistical analysis using H2 test, and we found no significant difference in mild nad severe toxicity in red blood cell count, white blood cell count, platelets and hemoglobin among groups.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to explore the experiences of older women post hip fracture who were exposed to a motivational intervention, the Exercise Plus Program, intended to increase adherence to exercise. DESIGN AND METHODS: This study used a naturalistic inquiry. We interviewed a total of 70 older women, 12 months post hip fracture, using an interview guide asking about issues related to willingness to exercise. All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed verbatim. RESULTS: Analysis of the semi-structured interviews revealed 44 codes that were categorized and reduced to 14 major themes. Eleven of these themes focused on components that facilitated participation in exercise and included: (a) real and expected benefits; (b) visual cues and knowing what to do; (c) simplicity; (d) individualized care; (e) verbal encouragement to exercise; (f) regular schedule; (g) confidence (i.e., self-efficacy); (h) determination; (i) social support; (j) reciprocity; and (k) goal identification. The remaining three themes reflected what decreased the participants' willingness to exercise: (a) unpleasant sensations; (b) constraints to exercise; and (c) getting back to baseline. IMPLICATIONS: The findings provide some support for the benefit of the Exercise Plus Program. Lessons learned in the Exercise Plus Program can be translated to the development of other motivational interventions to help engage older adults in exercise, particularly those individuals who recently experienced an acute event, such as a hip fracture.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the cost savings associated with a patient education and high-intensity strength intervention to improve rehabilitation after hip fracture. METHODS: Economic analysis conducted alongside a randomized controlled trial, using cost-benefit ratios and net present value statistics. Study subjects were aged over 64 years and were followed for 18 months postsurgery. Resource utilization data were gathered by telephone questionnaire. Medicare reimbursement rates and prevailing costs for services not covered by Medicare were used to convert utilization patterns into costs. Intervention costs were obtained from program records. RESULTS: The cost of the intervention was $722 per patient. Over the followup period, median costs were $11,941 and $21,577 for the intervention and control groups, respectively, yielding an average program benefit of $9,636. Cost-benefit ratios exceeded 4.5, and net present value exceeded $150,974. CCONCLUSION:The results indicate that the benefits of the intervention exceeded its costs.
Mental impairment is a common and serious complication in geriatric surgery. We studied 223 hip fracture patients. They were over 64 years of age (mean 81), with no history of mental deterioration and acutely admitted to hospital from independent living conditions. They were randomized into two groups. One of these was subjected to reorientation measures during the perioperative phase, i.e., presurgery admission to the orthopedic ward, accompanied home visits during the hospital stay and access to reorientation devices--they received a large clock, calendar, radio, TV-set, telephone and were encouraged to wear their own clothing. Otherwise, there were no differences in the treatment given to the two groups. We used monitoring of cognitive function with the Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) and a feedback program for evaluation of the treatment results. There was a low incidence of postoperative cognitive deterioration in both groups, compared with historical controls. However, no difference in mental status was noted when we compared the two groups. The conclusion is that attributes were less important than the psychological environment for postoperative mental deterioration. The mean total continuous hospitalization (transfers between departments and hospitals included) in the reorientation group was 22 (95% CI: 17-43) days, the corresponding figures for the controls were 30 (14-29) days.
Two appearance-based interventions designed to increase sun protection intentions and behaviors were evaluated. Sixty-eight college students in Experiment 1 and 76 beachgoers in Experiment 2 were randomly assigned to receive or not receive a photoaging (premature wrinkling and age spots) information intervention and, separately, to receive or not receive a novel ultraviolet (UV) photo intervention that makes the negative-appearance consequences of UV exposure more salient. Both experiments indicated that the UV photo intervention significantly increased intentions to use sunscreen in the future. A follow-up conducted with the beach sample indicated that UV photo information also produced greater protective behaviors for incidental sun exposure and that the combination of UV photo and photoaging information resulted in substantially lower reported sunbathing.
BACKGROUND: PeerCare is a workplace peer intervention program that focuses on changing workplace attitudes toward on-the-job substance use and trains workers to recognize, intervene with, and refer coworkers who have a problem. METHODS: Monthly injuries at the study company (January 1983 through June 1996) were compared to counts at four other companies in the same industry. Using these panel data, fixed-effects negative binomial regression measured the association of the percentage of the workforce covered by PeerCare with the workplace injury rate. RESULTS: For every 1% increase in the workforce covered with PeerCare, the risk of injury declined by 0.9984 (95% confidence interval, 0.9975-0.9994). These findings suggest that, by June 1996, when 86% of the workforce was covered under PeerCare, the program had reduced injury rates by an average 14% per month. CONCLUSIONS: The findings support the implementation of peer intervention programs as a means to reduce workplace injuries.
In this 12-week double-blind placebo-controlled trial of methylphenidate (MTP) versus placebo in 48 cocaine-dependent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) adults, the authors sought to determine whether MTP would be safe, control ADHD symptoms, and affect cocaine use. Efficacy indexes revealed significantly greater ADHD symptom relief in the MTP group. There were no group differences in self-reported cocaine use, urinalysis results, or cocaine craving. Because of the relatively small sample size, the results are preliminary. However, we found that MTP improved subjective reports of ADHD symptoms and did not worsen cocaine use while participants were in treatment.
A properly implemented agonist treatment regimen should improve retention and reduce illicit drug use. Cocaine-dependent subjects (N = 128) were enrolled in a 12-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. In the multistage dosing design, subjects initially received placebo (PBO) or 15 to 30 mg of dextroamphetamine sulfate, sustained-release capsules. At week 5, the dose doubled to 30 mg or 60 mg for active groups. Subjects attended the clinic twice a week, provided urine samples, obtained medication, and had one behavioral therapy session a week. Retention was best for the 15- to 30-mg group, whereas the proportion of benzoylecgonine-positive urine screens was, from lowest to highest, 30 to 60 mg, 15 to 30 mg, and PBO at study end. Dosing must be refined. The results provide support for additional examination of the agonist model in psychostimulant-dependence treatment.
This double-blind placebo-controlled treatment study tested the efficacy of mazindol in currently cocaine-dependent out-patients. Forty-three patients were randomized to mazindol (2 mg QD) vs. placebo treatment for 6 weeks. All patients received weekly group counseling. Patients improved with respect to objective (urine toxicology) and subjective (self-report of times used, dollars spent, craving, etc.) measures. There was no response difference between patients treated with mazindol and those who received placebo.
This pilot study examined the feasibility and efficacy of a brief alcohol misuse preventive intervention for 178 7th-9th grade junior high school students attending sports physical examinations at three schools during the Summer of 1997. At 6-month posttest, fewer suburban intervention youth intended to use alcohol during the next 6 months (chi2 = 7.01, 1 df, p = .01), and fewer rural intervention youth used alcohol during the past 30 days (chi2 = 4.65, 1 df, p = .04), compared to control youth. When suburban and rural school samples were collapsed, intervention youth had significantly lower alcohol use on three of four measures than control subjects (p's < .05).
This study examined the effects of a brief, pilot alcohol prevention intervention for 211 disadvantaged 6th grade school children at posttest and 1-year follow-up. Process data indicated that the intervention was successfully implemented and well received by youth and parent/guardian participants. ANCOVA analyses indicated a significant difference on alcohol use frequency for drinking subjects at 1-month posttest, with less frequent use reported by intervention subjects than subjects receiving the minimal control materials, F(1,22) = 5.37, p = .03. No differences were found between intervention and control subjects on alcohol use measures at 1-year follow-up. Critical issues to be resolved related to the success of future prevention research and practice are discussed.
This paper reports an evaluation of a community-based approach to prevent underage sales of alcohol. The interventions focused on (a) enforcement of underage sales laws, (b) responsible beverage service (RBS) training and (c) media advocacy. The interventions were implemented in three experimental communities located in California and South Carolina. Purchase survey data were obtained before and after the interventions in each experimental community and in three matched comparison communities. Logistic regression analyses of the purchase survey data for the individual community pairs and for the combined communities showed that sales to apparent minors were significantly reduced in the experimental sites. The findings indicate that these environmental interventions are promising prevention tools for communities that seek to reduce underage drinking.
This study examined the effects of brief nurse consultations in preventing alcohol use among inner-city youth. Participants included 138 sixth-eighth grade students attending an inner-city public school in Jacksonville, Florida. Subjects were randomly assigned by computer to either the intervention (STARS program) or a control group. Baseline and three-month post-tests were conducted at the target school site. A significant difference was found on heavy alcohol use with intervention subjects showing a reduction and control subjects an increase in heavy drinking (t = -2.33, 120df, p = .02). No differences were found between groups on other alcohol use measures. This study's findings indicate that a series of brief nurse consultations appear to reduce heavy alcohol consumption among urban school youth.
An alcohol misuse prevention curriculum for tenth-grade students was developed, implemented, and evaluated through twelfth grade with 1041 students from four school districts. The curriculum emphasized social pressures resistance training, immediate effects of alcohol, risks of alcohol misuse, and social pressures to misuse alcohol. There were desirable program effects on alcohol misuse prevention knowledge (p < 0.001), alcohol misuse (p < 0.02), and refusal skills (p < 0.09). Gender by occasion differences were found on alcohol use, alcohol misuse, and driving after drinking, with boys' rates increasing more than those of girls. Exposure to a sixth-grade, as well as the tenth-grade, program did not result in better outcomes. Despite high levels of alcohol use among high school students, a tenth-grade curriculum can result in some desirable effects. Creative approaches are needed, however, especially for boys who tend to use and misuse alcohol at rates that increase more steeply than those of girls.
Two versions of a school-based alcohol prevention programme for 7th grade students were evaluated against a non-treated comparison condition. Both programme versions were based on a social-cognitive theory approach to alcohol prevention, and differed in the level of role-specifications for participating teachers and peer leaders. Twelve schools with 955 students in Bergen, Norway, participated in the study. Four schools were randomly assigned to each of the three conditions, and the programme was implemented during 10 class periods over 2 months in Spring, 1992. Pre- and post-test surveys were conducted, assessing alcohol use, as well as cognitive variables related to alcohol use in a specific context (intentions, attitudes, norms and self-efficacy expectations). Results showed that the highly role-specified (HRS) version had a higher degree of student involvement than the less role-specified (LRS) version, indicating that the HRS programme was more successful in engaging students in alcohol prevention activities. A significant difference in programme effectiveness was found, as measured by an overall programme effect across all dependent variables. This effect was explained by significantly more positive outcomes in the HRS version compared to both the LRS and the non-treated conditions, while the LRS version did not differ significantly from the non-treated condition.
Alcohol-related injuries are a leading cause of death in mid and late adolescence. Schools might contribute to the prevention of these injuries by affecting adolescent drinking. Few school programmes, however, have succeeded. In view of this shortcoming, a previously investigated school based health counselling programme for mid adolescents was applied to work in conjunction with a municipal alcohol policy initiative. A pre-test/post-test quasi-experimental study of 118 sixteen year old students was carried out. The development of alcohol consumption was not found to differ significantly between the experimental and control groups. The students' perceptions of the negative effects of use of alcohol did not increase. The lack of effect of the counselling programme might be related to the low significance initially attributed by the students to alcohol as a health issue. A shift of emphasis in the schools, from normative education, to discussions of the immediate threats of serious injuries might alter this perception.
Tested the effectiveness of a youth drug prevention program in a community setting. Boys & Girls Clubs of America's Stay SMART program, adapted from a school-based personal and social competence drug prevention program, was offered, with and without a 2-year booster program, to 13-year-old members of Boys & Girls Clubs. Over 27 months, (a) 5 Boys & Girls Clubs offered the Stay SMART program, (b) 5 Boys & Girls Clubs offered the Stay SMART program with the booster programs, and (c) 4 Boys & Girls Clubs served as a control group. The Stay SMART program alone and the Stay SMART program with the booster programs showed effects for marijuana-related behavior, cigarette-related behavior, alcohol-related behavior, overall drug-related behavior, and knowledge concerning drug use. The Stay SMART program with the booster programs produced additional effects for alcohol attitudes and marijuana attitudes after each year of booster programs. Results suggest that a school-based personal and social competence program can be adapted effectively to a community setting and that booster programs might enhance program effects. Implications for alternative community models of prevention are discussed.
This paper presents the findings from a controlled prospective study of the effectiveness of a school-based alcohol education package for 13 year olds. The research had three phases: (1) baseline survey of alcohol-related knowledge, attitudes and behaviour; (2) development and teaching of a short alcohol education package and (3) follow-up survey. The results indicate that the students who received the alcohol education knew more about alcohol than the controls. In addition, the educational intervention was found to have influenced the self-reported last consumption of alcohol and maximum consumption, with the 'educated' youngsters generally exhibiting more restrained behaviour. There has been little scientific evidence that past alcohol education has been effective in changing young people's drinking behaviour. The outcome of this research reinforces some recent studies which suggest the way forward may lie in an educational approach which takes account of social influences on substance use and misuse.
The entire early adolescent population of the 15 communities that constitute the Kansas City (Kansas and Missouri) metropolitan area has participated in a community-based program for prevention of drug abuse since September 1984. The Kansas City area is the first of two major metropolitan sites being evaluated in the Midwestern Prevention Project, a longitudinal trial for primary prevention of cigarette, alcohol, and marijuana use in adolescents. The project includes mass media programming, a school-based educational program for youths, parent education and organization, community organization, and health policy components that are introduced sequentially into communities during a 6-year period. Effects of the program are determined through annual assessments of adolescent drug use in schools that are assigned to immediate intervention or delayed intervention control conditions. In the first 2 years of the project, 22,500 sixth- and seventh-grade adolescents received the school-based educational program component, with parental involvement in homework and mass media coverage. Analyses of 42 schools indicate that the prevalence rates of use for all three drugs are significantly lower at 1-year follow-up in the intervention condition relative to the delayed intervention condition, with or without controlling for race, grade, socioeconomic status, and urbanicity (17% vs 24% for cigarette smoking, 11% vs 16% for alcohol use, and 7% vs 10% for marijuana use in the last month), and the net increase in drug use prevalence among intervention schools is half that of delayed intervention schools.
The use of peer leaders as facilitators for smoking and alcohol abuse prevention with adolescents is one component of recently successful programs. Peer leaders are unique in their abilities to influence peer group behavior because they are members of the peer group, are credible role models and disseminators of social information, and utilize the same language as their peers. Peer leaders can be trained to modify environmental, personality, and behavioral factors that are predictive of alcohol use among adolescents, and become a viable alternative to teachers and adult leaders. The WHO Collaborative Study on Alcohol Education and Young People compared a peer-led alcohol educational program to a teacher-led program to no program in 25 schools in Australia, Chile, Norway, and Swaziland. The educational program emphasized refusal skills for alcohol use among 8th and 9th graders in the four countries. The peer-led educational program appears to be efficacious in reducing adolescent involvement with alcohol across a variety of settings, economies, and cultures. Peer leadership may be a particularly promising approach to prevention, theoretically and empirically.
A comprehensive evaluation was conducted of a representative alcohol education program designed to enhance knowledge and self-esteem, instill appropriate attitudes and teach the decision-making skills necessary for youth to make responsible decisions about the use of alcohol. The curriculum was implemented approximately as intended. The immediate, cumulative and longer-term effects of curriculum exposure on the variables thought to mediate alcohol use were modest or unsystematic. There was no consistent evidence of carryover effects from curriculum exposure on subsequent use of alcohol, cigarettes or other drugs. The curriculum was ineffective in attaining its goals.
Sixty individuals seeking outpatient treatment for marijuana dependence were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 treatments: motivational enhancement (M), M plus behavioral coping skills therapy (MBT), or MBT plus voucher-based incentives (MBTV). In the voucher-based incentive program, participants earned vouchers exchangeable for retail items contingent on them submitting cannabinoid-negative urine specimens. MBTV engendered significantly greater durations of documented marijuana abstinence during treatment compared with MBT and M, and a greater percentage of participants in the MBTV group compared with the MBT or M groups were abstinent at the end of treatment. No significant differences in marijuana abstinence were observed between the MBT and M groups. The positive effects of the voucher program in this study support the utility of incentive-based interventions for the treatment of substance dependence disorders including marijuana dependence.
Adult marijuana users (N = 291) seeking treatment were randomly assigned to an extended 14-session cognitive-behavioral group treatment (relapse prevention support group; RPSG), a brief 2-session individual treatment using motivational interviewing (individualized assessment and intervention; IAI), or a 4-month delayed treatment control (DTC) condition. Results indicated that marijuana use, dependence symptoms, and negative consequences were reduced significantly in relation to pretreatment levels at 1-, 4-, 7-, 13-, and 16-month follow-ups. Participants in the RPSG and IAI treatments showed significantly and substantially greater improvement than DTC participants at the 4-month follow-up. There were no significant differences between RPSG and IAI outcomes at any follow-up. The relative efficacy of brief versus extended interventions for chronic marijuana-using adults is discussed.
Men (n = 161) and women (n = 51) seeking treatment for marijuana use were randomly assigned to either a relapse prevention (RP; G.A. Marlatt & J.R. Gordon, 1985) or a social support (SSP) group discussion intervention. Data collected for 12 months posttreatment revealed substantial reductions in frequency of marijuana use and associated problems. There were no significant differences between the cognitive-behavioral RP intervention and the SSP group discussion conditions on measures of days of marijuana use, related problems, or abstinence rates. Men in the RP condition were more likely than men in the SSP condition to report reduced use without problems at 3-month follow-up. Posttreatment increases in problems associated with alcohol did not appear to relate to reduced marijuana use. Results are discussed in terms of the need for further research with marijuana-dependent adults and the efficacy of RP.
A controlled clinical study was conducted to evaluate prospectively the clinical efficacy of tinnitus masking (TM) and tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) in military veterans having clinically significant tinnitus. Qualifying patients were placed into the two groups in an alternating manner (to avoid selection bias), and treatment was administered at 0, 3, 6, 12, and 18 months. Outcomes of treatment were evaluated using three self-administered tinnitus questionnaires (Tinnitus Handicap Inventory, Tinnitus Handicap Questionnaire, Tinnitus Severity Index) and the verbally administered TRT interview forms. Findings are presented from the three written questionnaires, and from two of the interview questions (percentage time aware of, and annoyed by, tinnitus). Outcomes were analyzed on an intent-to-treat basis, using a multilevel modeling approach. Of the 123 patients enrolled, 118 were included in the analysis. Both groups showed significant declines (improvements) on these measures, with the TRT decline being significantly greater than for TM. The greater declines in TRT compared to TM occurred most strongly in patients who began treatment with a "very big" tinnitus problem. When patients began treatment with a "moderate" tinnitus problem, the benefits of TRT compared to TM were more modest.
This study examined the relationship of antisocial personality disorder (APD) to response to continuing care treatments in a sample of cocaine-dependent patients. Patients (N = 127) were randomly assigned to 20-week standard group or individualized relapse prevention continuing care interventions after the completion of an initial treatment episode and followed up at 3, 6, and 12 months. APD and non-APD patients did not differ on retention in continuing care, substance use outcomes, social function outcomes, or experiences before or during cocaine relapse episodes. A diagnosis of APD was also not a predictor of differential response to the two continuing care interventions in the study. However, APD patients had worse medical and psychiatric problem severity than non-APD patients at entrance to continuing care and during follow-up. These results suggest that cocaine patients with APD who are in the continuing care phase of outpatient rehabilitation might benefit from additional medical and psychiatric treatment services.
This study examined the relatively unexplored contribution of the therapist's performance in determining outcomes of treatment. Nine therapists were studied: three performed supportive-expressive psychotherapy; three, cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy; and three, drug counseling. Profound differences were discovered in the therapists' success with the patients in their case loads. Four potential determinants of these differences were explored: patient factors; therapist factors; patient-therapist relationship factors; and therapy factors. Results showed that patient characteristics within each case load (after random assignments) were similar and disclosed no differences that would have explained the differences in success; therapist's personal qualities were correlated with outcomes but not significantly (mean r = .32); an early-in-treatment measure of the patient-therapist relationship, the Helping Alliance Questionnaire, yielded significant correlations with outcomes (mean r = .65); among the therapy techniques, "purity" provided significant correlations with outcomes (mean r = .44), both across therapists and within each therapist's case load. The three therapist-related factors were moderately associated with each other.
Sixty healthy women undergoing elective Caesarean section were randomly allocated to either a measured 15 degrees left table tilt position (n = 31) or full left lateral position (n = 29) for a 15-min period after spinal blockade. Arm and leg blood pressure, ephedrine requirements, symptoms, fetal heart rate, cord gases and Apgar scores were recorded. Mean ephedrine requirements and incidence of hypotension were similar in the two groups. Arm systolic arterial pressure over time was similar in both groups, but leg systolic arterial pressure over time was significantly lower in the tilt group (p < 0.001); the mean leg systolic arterial pressure was lower for all 15 sequential recordings in the tilt group, reaching statistical significance (p < 0.05) at 4, 5, 6 and 8 min. Differences in maternal nausea, vomiting and bradycardia and fetal outcome were not statistically significant. Following spinal anaesthesia, even a true 15 degrees left table tilt position is associated with aortic compression.
The relative merits of right and left lateral tilt were assessed in 75 parturients at elective caesarean section. Significant maternal hypotension (aortocaval occlusion) occurred more frequently with rightward tilt (left hip supported). The clinical and biochemical status of the fetus was generally more favourable with left lateral tilt, as were the maternal-to-fetal blood gas gradients and relationships. The routine use of left lateral tilt is advocated.
RCT was used in 73 patients who had experienced blood transfusion febrile reactions. For further two transfusions Benadryl was used before the first transfusion and hydrocortisone before the second in 36 patients. In the other group of 37 patients hydrocortisone was administered before the first the and Benadryl before the second transfusion. The effective rate of preventing transfusion febrile reactions with Benadryl (72.6%) was not significantly different from that with hydrocortisone (86.3%).
The efficacy of a novel, proprietary topical formulation of ibuprofen 5% gel (Ibugel) was evaluated in a placebo-controlled study in patients with soft tissue injuries. Patients received either active gel (n=40) or placebo gel (n=41) for a maximum of seven days. Pain and interference with physical activity were assessed daily using visual analogue scales. There was a significant difference (p<0.001) in favour of active treatment for the time to achieve clinically meaningful reduction in pain. By day 7, 75% of patients in the active gel group had a clinically meaningful reduction of pain compared with 39% of patients who received placebo. Despite differences between study centres, the data for interference with physical activity also showed an advantage for active treatment. By day 7, 79% of patients in the active gel group had a clinically meaningful reduction in interference with physical activity, compared with 44% of patients who received placebo.
One hundred patients who presented to the accident and emergency (A&E) department with an acute ankle sprain were entered into a study to determine the efficacy of topical ibuprofen cream by using a double-blind placebo controlled design in a single type of soft-tissue injury. The subjects were given either topical ibuprofen cream or a placebo cream in addition to the standard management of the department. Patients kept diaries recording walking ability and pain visual analogue scales for resting, standing and walking. A total of 51 patients returned diaries that were suitable for analysis. Patients using the topical ibuprofen cream had significant reduction in pain scores over the first 48 h of treatment.
A parallel, double-blind, placebo controlled and randomized study in a single center was done with ketoprofen 2.5% gel to treat acute soft tissue injuries. Patients applied the gel twice a day for seven days, corresponding to 250 mg of ketoprofen per day. Assessments were made on the third and seventh day by VAS, subjective evaluation and pain threshold algometry. The study group consisted of 29 patients and the control group 27 patients. Pain at rest was significantly relieved in the ketoprofen group, whereas in the placebo group the difference was not significant. In terms of side-effects, no difference between the groups was noticed. In both groups, local dermal irritation was found. Our results suggested that ketoprofen 2.5% gel was safe and superior to placebo in the treatment of soft tissue injuries.
In this study the authors evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of a foam of 15% ketoprofen lysine salt versus placebo in patients with articular traumas, pains and strains, distortions etc. All parameters considered were statistically significantly decreased after 7 days of active treatment as compared to placebo. Pain score decreased significantly at pressure (p < 0.001), pain on active movement (p < 0.005), pain on passive movement and pain at rest. Efficacy of the active foam was graded as satisfactory in 81.7% and its tolerability in 92.7% versus 44% and 29% with placebo respectively. Patients reported high acceptability (89%) of the new foam formulation. No systemic or local side effects were observed or reported. The 15% ketoprofen lysine salt foam for topical use can be considered an effective antiinflammatory and analgesic drug for the treatment of minor orthopedic and traumatic disorders, and was found to be perfectly tolerated.
A double-blind study vs placebo was carried out on 82 pts suffering from soft tissue trauma, to evaluate the efficacy and tolerance of a new anti-inflammatory, non-steroidal analgesic for topical use, 3% BPAA. Clinical results obtained by the group treated with BPAA gel were highly significant (p = 0.01) and positive, showing absence of local and systemic side-effects. Accordingly, BPAA gel can be recommended for treatment of soft tissue trauma.
Two hundred and thirty-one patients with acute soft tissue injuries were treated in a double-blind placebo-controlled study of felbinac (biphenylacetic acid) gel applied three times daily to the injured site. Those treated with felbinac had significantly greater improvement at Day 4 (p less than 0.001) and Day 7 (p less than 0.02) than those who received placebo. Patients' self-assessment diary cards confirmed superiority of the active treatment as early as Day 2 of the study. Local skin reactions were few (three per cent), mild and recovered spontaneously. Felbinac is an effective management for acute soft tissue injuries and because of its topical application may be safer than oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the treatment of these conditions.
A double-blind, parallel trial was undertaken with 3% benzydamine cream compared with a matching placebo, on patients suffering acute soft-tissue injuries. 21 patients received active material and 22 received placebo material. Patients applied the cream lightly 6 times a day for 6 days. Assessments were made (by the same physician) on days 0, 2, 4 and 6, and signs and symptoms were graded as "absent", "slight", "moderate" or "severe". Thermograms were taken on day 0 and day 6. The results showed significant relief of spontaneous pain, significant reduction in tenderness on pressure and in swelling on days 2, 4 and 6 of the trial, and a significant reduction in functional impairment on days 4 and 6, in the patients who had received the 3% benzydamine cream.
Fentiazac 5% cream was applied topically on limited articular and extra-articular inflammatory lesions in the course of a double-blind clinical trial versus placebo. The drug proved to be satisfactorily tolerated and also therapeutically effective since it changed significantly (p less than 0.05--less than 0.01) the spontaneous course of the microtraumatic pathologic pattern producing an early attenuation and resolution of the painful and functional symptomatic pattern.
A double-blind, controlled clinical study with benzydamine hydrochloride 3% cream was conducted in an Occupational Health Centre on fifty patients with soft tissue injuries (two mild, ten moderate and thirteen severe cases in the placebo group and one mild, thirteen moderate and twelve severe cases in the active group). The trial demonstrated the significant therapeutic superiority of 3% benzydamine cream over inactive placebo in all six qualitative parameters for traumatic inflammatory changes at the end of a six-day assessment and a marked improvement of symptoms event two days after the onset of therapy. In addition, tbe incidental use of ultrasound therapy together with the standard treatment revealed the value of the active drug as an effective couplant. Neither group suffered any side-effects. Although the size of population studied was small, it was apparent that active treatment with benzydamine was a distinct aid to healing of soft tissue injuries and this should be confirmed with further large-scale clinical trials.
As part of an evaluation of a water supply and sanitation project, a baseline cross-sectional study of diarrhoea, and its putative risk factors, was conducted in 5 villages in Imo State, Nigeria. Data were collected from 4641 and 5920 persons during surveys in the dry and wet seasons, respectively. 8 d period prevalence rates for diarrhoea ranged from 5 to 50%, with the highest rates occurring in the 6 to 23 month age group. Diarrhoea was associated with up to 75% of all illnesses in young children and with about 20% in adults. Risk factors included lower socio-economic status, an unclean domestic environment, use of non-purified water, absence of soap, and feeding methods other than exclusive breast-feeding in the early months of infancy. These results suggest that the education component of water supply and sanitation projects should emphasize personal and domestic hygiene and infant feeding.
Two-hundred consecutive patients thought to have suffered a myocardial infarction were admitted to a randomised, double-blind controlled trial of oxygen or air administered by MC mask throughout the first 24 hours in hospital. Forty-three patients in whom myocardial infarction was not subsequently confirmed were excluded from the analysis. The remaining air and oxygen groups were comparable except for a significantly higher PaO2 and serum aspartate aminotransferase level in the oxygen group. There was no significant difference in mortality, incidence of arrhythmias, use of analgesics, or systolic time intervals between the two groups, although a higher incidence of sinus tachycardia was found in those given oxygen. There appears to be no evidence of benefit from the routine administration of oxygen in uncomplicated myocardial infarction.
Osteogenic proteins (OP) are elements of a class of natural growth factors called Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMP). A specific member of this class is OP-1, a human recombinant protein that has osteogenic properties. The osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties of OP-1, with its specific collagen matrix, promote the generation of new functionally active, biologically and biomechanically mature bone. We carried out a clinical study to verify the potential of this protein in fresh tibial closed fractures, using OP-1 associated with osteosynthesis by means of a monolateral external fixator.
We performed a prospective, randomised double-blind study in 24 patients undergoing high tibial osteotomy to evaluate the effectiveness of human recombinant osteogenic protein (OP-1) on a collagen type-I carrier in a critically-sized fibular defect. The study had two phases, each evaluated by clinical, radiological and DEXA methods during the first postoperative year. The first concerned the validation of the model of the fibular defect, using positive (demineralised bone) and negative (untreated) controls. The second phase concerned the osteogenic potential of OP-1 on collagen type-I v collagen type-I alone. The results of the first phase established the critically-sized nature of the defect. In the untreated group no bony changes were observed while, in the demineralised bone group, formation of new bone was visible from six weeks onwards. The results of the second phase showed no significant formation of new bone in the presence of collagen alone, while in the OP-1 group, all patients except one showed formation of new bone from six weeks onwards. This proved the osteogenic activity of OP-1 in a validated critically-sized human defect.
Osteogenic proteins (OPs), also referred to as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), are a family of bone-matrix polypeptides isolated from a variety of mammalian species. Implantation of osteogenic proteins induces a sequence of cellular events that leads to the formation of new bone. In preclinical studies, the implantation of recombinantly produced human osteogenic protein-1 (OP-1, also referred to as BMP-7) into surgically created, critical-size diaphyseal segmental defects resulted in the regeneration of new bone that was fully functional biologically and biomechanically. Injection of an OP-1 solution into a fresh fracture model accelerated the bone repair process compared with control fracture healing. This was the result of greater and earlier new bone formation. Further study has demonstrated that OP-1 can be used as a bone graft substitute to promote spinal fusion, aid in the incorporation of metal implants, and improve the performance of autograft and allograft bone. Clinical study of OP-1 implanted in conjunction with a bovine bone-derived type 1 collagen carrier for the treatment of tibial nonunion fractures has shown healing characteristics similar to that obtained with autogenous iliac crest bone graft. Advantages of OP-1 included no donor site complications, less blood loss, and a shorter operative time.
Pre-eclampsia is suggested to be characterized by a functional imbalance between vascular prostacyclin and thromboxane A2 production. On the basis of this hypothesis it is attempted to correct this pathologic conditions by pharmacological manipulation with Trapidil, a triazolo pyrimidin derivative, because of its effects on the prostanoid metabolism. A prospective, randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study was carried out to investigate Trapidil in the prevention of pregnancy-induced hypertension or pre-eclampsia. A total of 160 pregnant women with the risk to develop pre-eclampsia received Trapidil or placebo between week 24 and 38 of gestation. The number of patients in whom pregnancy-induced hypertension or pre-eclampsia developed was significantly lower in the Trapidil-treated (5.5%) compared with the placebo-treated group (14.1%). Additionally, a reduced risk of preterm deliveries and severe fetal growth retardation could be observed. In 7 patients with manifest pre-eclampsia or pregnancy-induced hypertension the circulating eicosanoid concentrations were determined before and during Trapidil medication. Trapidil was associated with an about twofold increase of 6-keto PGF1 alpha concentration in the peripheral venous blood, while the concentration of thromboxane A2 revealed no changes.
Borderline personality disorder does not have a first choice pharmacological treatment. We studied 20 borderline inpatients in a double-blind parallel placebo-controlled trial with carbamazepine for a mean of 30.9 days. No significant positive effects of the drug were found.
The authors report the final results of a 4-year study of amitriptyline and haloperidol in 90 symptomatic borderline inpatients. Medication trials were double-blind and placebo controlled and lasted 5 weeks. Haloperidol (4-16 mg/day) produced significant improvement over placebo in global functioning, depression, hostility, schizotypal symptoms, and impulsive behavior. Significant effects of amitriptyline (100-175 mg/day) were generally limited to measures of depression. Factor analysis identified three symptom change patterns: a global depression, hostile depression, and schizotypal symptom pattern. Medication effects favoring haloperidol were most prominent for hostile depression. Variables predicting favorable response to haloperidol included severity of schizotypal symptoms, hostility, and suspiciousness. Schizotypal symptoms and paranoia predicted poor outcome on both depression patterns with amitriptyline. Placebo effects were most prominent on acute state symptoms, with severe character traits predicting poor response.
Fifty outpatients with borderline and/or schizotypal personality disorder were randomly allocated to thiothixene (Navane) or placebo treatment that was continued for 12 weeks. The mean daily dosage of thiothixene hydrochloride in the final week of the study was 8.7 mg, a lower dosage than is used in outpatient schizophrenics. Significant drug-placebo differences were found, regardless of diagnosis, on "illusions," "ideas of reference," "psychoticism," "obsessive-compulsive symptoms," and "phobic anxiety," but not on "depression." Thiothixene seems to have more than an antipsychotic effect. Since response to treatment studies are a means for reformulating diagnostic concepts, we suggest a subdiagnosis defined by those symptoms that are drug-responsive, some of which are not included in current diagnostic criteria. Patients with borderline and schizotypal disorder without the foregoing symptoms probably would not profit from thiothixene and might needlessly be placed at risk for adverse drug effects.
A total of 144 evaluable patients with breast cancer were enrolled in a multicenter, randomized, prospective study to establish the role of delayed shoulder exercises on wound drainage and shoulder function after axillary lymph node dissection. Patients in group 1 (n = 78) started active shoulder exercises 1 day postoperatively. Patients in group 2 (n = 66) started on the eight postoperative day, following 1 week of immobilization of the arm. Patients in group 2 had 14% less wound drainage volume than those in group 1 (600 +/- 436 mL versus 701 +/- 398 mL); this difference, however, was not significant. Also, no differences could be established between the two groups when duration and volume of wound drainage, number and volume of seroma aspirations, wound complication rates, and shoulder function were compared 6 months after surgery.
A prospective clinical trial was conducted to determine the effect of axillary node dissection for breast carcinoma on shoulder function and seroma production. 59 Operations were carried out in 57 patients. The patients were divided into two groups. In group A, shoulder exercises were started, under the guidance of a physiotherapist, immediately following surgery, and in group B the exercises were begun on the seventh postoperative day. A full range of motion within six months was achieved in 25 patients of group A (81%) and in 22 of group B (79%). There was no significant difference in wound drainage between the two groups. Restricted shoulder movement was often seen after local wound complications following axillary radiotherapy or after seriously disturbed wound healing.
A randomized prospective clinical trial has been performed to determine the effect of temporary immobilization of the shoulder on wound drainage following radical mastectomy. In 64 patients admitted to the trial the mean volume of drainage was reduced by 40 per cent in those who had shoulder movement restricted for the first 7 days after operation when compared with the group in whom early arm exercises were encouraged. The mean drainage time was reduced by 29 per cent. Shoulder immobilization did not result in increased shoulder stiffness, although there was an increased incidence of mild lymphoedema of the arm.
The object of this study was to compare the protective action of a new barrier cream (Excipial Protect, Spirig Pharma AG, Egerkingen, Switzerland) to its vehicle in the context of hand irritation of apprentice hairdressers caused by repeated shampooing and exposure to hair-care products. This was a double-blind cross-over comparing Excipial Protect (containing aluminium chlorohydrate 5% as active ingredient) against its vehicle alone. The efficacy of the creams was evaluated taking into account: (1) clinical scores by researchers, (2) biometric measurements, (3) subjective opinions of the subjects. An analysis of variance was performed considering order of application, degree of atopy, and reported number of shampoos. We observed very little difference in efficacy between the protective cream and its vehicle. The presence, however, of aluminium chlorhydrate in the protective cream was shown to have a positive effect against work-related irritation. The cosmetic qualities of the creams seemed, to the participants, to be as important as their real protective and hydrating properties, an important factor in compliance issues.
OBJECTIVE: This single-centre non-blind randomised controlled trial aimed to compare clinical outcomes in terms of recovery time of standard treatment of lower limb cellulitis versus standard treatment combined with cycloidal vibration (Vibro-Pulse) therapy. METHOD: Thirty-six patients (18 per group) with lower limb cellulitis were randomised to receive either standard treatment (intravenous or oral antibiotic therapy) and bed rest or standard treatment combined with cycloidal vibration treatment three times per day, 30 minutes per treatment. The outcome measure was the daily amount of reduction in erythema/cellulitis and oedema reduction against time for up to seven days of treatment and the resources required. RESULTS: There was a clinically significant difference between the two groups, with 66% of the study group fully recovering within the seven days compared with 11% of the control group. CONCLUSION: Cycloidal vibration combined with standard therapy can significantly reduce cellulitis treatment time. This can reduce both hospital bed days and the resources required.
112 patients admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of erysipelas, were randomized to 8 days treatment with prednisolone or placebo in addition to antibiotics. 108 patients received the study drugs and were evaluated for time to cure, which was the primary end-point. The median healing time was significantly shorter in the prednisolone group, 5 days, vs 6 days in the placebo group (p < 0.01). The 90th percentile healing time was 10.0 days in the prednisolone group vs 14.6 days in the control group. The prednisolone-treated patients had a median length of hospital stay (secondary end-point) of 5 days vs 6 for the placebo-treated (p < 0.01). The median treatment time with intravenous antibiotics (secondary end-point) was 4 days in the placebo group, which was 1 day longer than in the prednisolone group (p < 0.05). 13 patients, 7 of whom received placebo, relapsed during the observation period of 3 weeks. The frequency of side effects attributable to the study drug was not higher in the prednisolone group.
A prospective, randomized, multicentre trial was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of roxithromycin (150 mg b.i.d. orally) and penicillin (2.5 MU x 8 daily intravenously, then 6 MU daily orally) in the treatment of hospitalized adult patients with erysipelas. Seventy-two patients entered the study. Thirty-one patients in the roxithromycin group and 38 patients in the penicillin group completed the trial. The overall efficacy rates (cure without additional antibiotics) were 84% (26/31) in the roxithromycin group and 76% (29/38) in the penicillin group (P = 0.43). No side-effects were observed in the roxithromycin-treated patients whereas rashes occurred in two cases in the penicillin group, leading to exclusion from the study. Oral roxithromycin can thus be considered an effective and well-tolerated treatment for erysipelas in adult hospitalized patients.
Is the administration of oral antibiotics four times a day as necessary as some pharmacokinetic studies indicate? The efficacy of cephalexin administered twice a day was compared to the same drug administered four times a day for the treatment of skin and skin structure infections due to staphylococcus and/or streptococcus. The 154 outpatients in this four-clinic study ranged in age from 1 month to more than 70 years. A random number table was used to assign patients to either the twice a day or the four times a day regimen. The total daily dosage was the same in each regimen. Administration twice a day proved equally effective to the four times a day regimen. Both regimens were more than 97 percent effective and side effects were minimal.
PURPOSE: To investigate the efficacy of concurrent hyperfractionated radiation therapy (HFX RT) and low-dose daily chemotherapy (CHT) in stage III non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between January 1990 and December 1991, 131 patients with histologically or cytologically confirmed stage III NSCLC, Karnofsky performance status (KPS) > or = 50, and no previous therapy were randomly treated as follows: group I, HFX RT with 1.2 Gy twice daily to a total dose of 69.6 Gy (n = 66); and group II, same HFX RT with CHT consisting of 50 mg of carboplatin (CBDCA) and 50 mg of etoposide (VP-16) given on each RT day (n = 65). RESULTS: Group II patients had a significantly longer survival time than group I patients, with a median survival of 22 versus 14 months and 4-year survival rates of 23% versus 9% (P = .021). The median time to local recurrence and 4-year local recurrence-free survival rate were also significantly higher in group II than in group I (25 v 20 months and 42% v 19% respectively, P = .015). In contrast, the distant metastasis-free survival rate did not significantly differ in the two groups (P = .33). The two groups showed similar incidence of acute and late high-grade toxicity (P = .44 and .75, respectively). No treatment-related toxicity was observed. CONCLUSION: The combination of HFX RT and low-dose daily CBDCA plus VP-16 was tolerable and improved the survival of patients with stage III NSCLC as a result of improved local control.
Between January 1987 and June 1991, 173 patients with inoperable non-small cell lung cancer, Stage III, were entered into a randomized trial comparing radiotherapy only (RT) (45 Gy/15 fractions/3 weeks) (arm A) versus RT and a daily low dose of cDDP (6 mg/m2) (arm B). An overall response rate of 58.9% was observed in arm A and 50.6% in arm B, respectively. No differences in the pattern of relapse were noted between the two treatment groups. Median time to progression was 10.6 months for arm A and 14.2 months for arm B. Median survivals were 10.3 months and 9.97 months, respectively. Toxicity was acceptable and no treatment-related death occurred in either treatment schedule. In this study no significant advantage of the combined treatment over radiation therapy only was found. The encouraging results achieved in some trials together with the intractability of the disease suggest that further efforts should be made to optimize clinical trial protocols, perhaps by reviewing the radiobiological and pharmacological basis of the combined treatment.
An experimental examination of three approaches to alcohol education compared a cognitive program, a decision-making program and a values-clarification program. The cognitive program was most positively received and was superior in raising levels of knowledge; the values-clarification program was least effective, especially as measured by the program's impact on current and expected alcohol use.
The chronic care model is a guide to higher-quality chronic illness management within primary care. The model predicts that improvement in its 6 interrelated components-self-management support, clinical information systems, delivery system redesign, decision support, health care organization, and community resources-can produce system reform in which informed, activated patients interact with prepared, proactive practice teams. Case studies are provided describing how components of the chronic care model have been implemented in the primary care practices of 4 health care organizations.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found a lack of information on the acceptability of computerised cognitive behavioural therapy to patients and concluded that future studies should collect such information through surveys and qualitative research. These conclusions follow from the limited data available and are likely to be reliable.
During five years, 97 young infants with colic were studied. One of us (J. C. O'D.) compared homatropine methylbromide plus phenobarbital in a 20% alcohol solution, and all of the individual components of that solution, to see which was most effective in the symptomatic relief of colic. Regardless of the child's age on entry into the study, conditions in no treatment group improved more rapidly than in those treated with a placebo.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is one of the most common anxiety disorders and has a poor prognosis, although it is often thought to be a minor complaint. This disorder has a chronic course of 5-15 years and longer. Long-term treatment with the commonly used benzodiazepines is controversial because of concerns over tolerance and dependence. We performed a thorough search of the literature for clinical trials of a duration of over 2 months conducted in patients with generalized anxiety disorder in order to identify any successful long-term treatment of this disorder. Only eight long-term reports of studies conducted in well-defined homogeneous groups of patients diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder were found with the methodology of these studies presenting a number of limiting factors. The results are inconclusive and no reference drug could be identified. In addition, an adequate evaluation of the long-term treatment of GAD has not yet been performed.

CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the effects of mechanical ventilation with lower tidal volumes on ventilator-associated lung injury in patients without acute lung injury (ALI) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The author concluded that the use of lower tidal volumes was associated with a reduction in ventilator-associated lung injury, but inconsistent results were also found in some studies. Without further details on study quality and given the other methodological concerns in the review process, the author's conclusions may not be reliable.
Thyromental distance (TMD) measurement is commonly used to predict difficult intubation. We surveyed anaesthetists to determine how this test was being performed. Comparative accuracy of ruler measurement and other forms of measurement were also assessed in a meta-analysis of published literature. Of respondents, 72% used fingers for TMD measurement and also considered three finger widths the minimum acceptable TMD. In terms of distance, the minimum acceptable TMD was felt to be 6.5 cm by 55% of respondents. However, the actual width of three fingers was (range) 4.6-7.0 cm (mean 5.9 cm), with significant differences between genders and between proximal and distal interphalangeal joints. The meta-analysis showed ruler measurement increased test sensitivity (48% (95% CI 43-53) vs 16% (95% CI 14-19) without a ruler), when predicting difficult intubation.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that capsule endoscopy (CE) and double balloon enteroscopy (DBE) had similar diagnostic yields for the localisation of bleeding in patients with occult gastrointestinal bleeding, and the yield of DBE was increased when used after a positive CE. These conclusions reflect the data presented, but should be interpreted cautiously due to potential methodological limitations in the review process.
The hemodynamic effects of 2 plasma volume expanders were compared in postoperative open heart surgery patients. Albumin 5% (A) or hydroxyethyl starch 6% (HES) solutions were infused according to indications based on cardiac index (CI) and pulmonary wedge pressure (WP), and their effects evaluated by physiologic profile measurements. Both groups demonstrated significant increases with volume infusion in CI (A from 2.37 to 2.84; HES from 1.97 to 2.49 L/min X m2) and WP (A from 9.4 to 13.7 mm Hg; HES from 11.9 to 13.2 mm Hg). Stroke index and stroke work increased similarly. Mean systemic arterial pressure (MAP) and mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) remained unchanged. No significant difference for any variable was demonstrated between the A and HES groups. In the volume used, from 250 to 750 ml, HES caused no bleeding abnormalities. HES is as effective as A as a plasma volume expander in postoperative cardiac surgery patients.

Osseointegrated dental implants are increasingly used in the rehabilitation of the dental patient. They have a particular role in dental rehabilitation following treatment for oral cancer. Data is presented that suggests that, in the at risk patient, squamous cell carcinoma may develop in association with dental implants.

Noncontingent reinforcement (NCR) is a function-based treatment for problem behavior that has produced robust effects across a variety of response topographies and reinforcement functions among individuals with developmental disabilities. Several narrative reviews have adequately described this literature. The purpose of the present article was to quantitatively analyze and classify the empirical support for NCR using the criteria developed by The Task Force on the Promotion and Dissemination of Psychological Procedures [Task Force Promoting Dissemination of Psychological Procedures. (1995). Training in and dissemination of empirically-validated psychological treatments: Report and recommendations. Clinical Psychology, 48, 3-23]. Of the 59 studies identified for analysis, 24 met the criteria to be included in treatment classification. Fixed-time reinforcer delivery (plus extinction and schedule thinning) was classified as well established, while fixed-time reinforcer delivery (plus extinction) and variable-time reinforcer delivery (plus extinction) were deemed probably efficacious.

CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the long-term efficacy (at least 4 weeks) of topical therapies for pain control in primary knee osteoarthritis. The authors concluded that topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) provide effective pain relief for knee osteoarthritis. The authors caution against generalising to other NSAID preparations. The small data set on which the review was based, differences in treatment duration, uncertain study quality, and uncertainty about the statistical techniques used suggest that the authors' conclusion should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated digital block techniques for treating finger injuries. The authors concluded that traditional digital blocks and single subcutaneous palmar injection blocks produce similar injection pain, and are less painful than the transthecal digital block. Palmar techniques are associated with incomplete anaesthesia. Given the small number of variable and poor-quality studies, the reliability of the authors' conclusions is unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed nutritional support for patients with acute pancreatitis. The authors concluded that enteral nutrition improved outcomes compared with parenteral nutrition in patients with severe acute pancreatitis. The authors' conclusions appear to be supported by the evidence presented, but the inadequate reporting of study quality makes it difficult to assess the reliability of the results.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of body position on oxygen saturation in acute stroke. The authors found strong evidence that position does not affect oxygen saturation in non-hypoxic patients without relevant co-morbidities and limited evidence favouring an upright position for patients with relevant co-morbidities. The lack of supporting data from individual studies make the reliability of the conclusions uncertain.
Abortion decisions have a potentially meaningful effect on the lives of men. Previous research suggests that both men and women generally believe that men have the right to be involved in such decisions. However, very little research attention has been devoted to identifying individual difference correlates of discrepant levels of endorsement for male involvement in abortion decisions. The extent to which abortion attitudes (on a pro-choice to pro-life continuum), conceptualization of abortion as strictly a female issue, and interest in the issue operate as effective predictors of the appropriate level of male involvement in abortion decisions was examined in a sample of 1,387 college students. Results of a multiple regression analysis revealed that 44% of the variance in male involvement scores was explained by the predictor variables.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the impact of nursing interventions on patients' quality of life. The authors concluded that counselling, patient education, cognitive behavioural techniques and exercise do improve quality of life. The conclusions may not be reliable since the review used an inappropriate method to synthesise the results.
The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG) protocol GI-7175 randomized 227 patients between 1975 and 1980 following complete surgical resection of stages B2 and C rectal adenocarcinoma to four treatment arms: (1) no adjuvant therapy, (2) chemotherapy only, (3) radiotherapy only, and (4) radiotherapy and chemotherapy (combined modality). The results of the study showed an advantage for combined modality treatment over no adjuvant therapy for time to recurrence (p = 0.005) and for survival (p = 0.01). Severe acute toxicity was frequent in the combined modality arm (61%) but late effects, including radiation enteritis, have been infrequent. We conclude that postoperative adjuvant therapy is indicated in certain stages of rectal carcinoma and that the present state of knowledge suggests combined modality therapy.

Immediate mandibular complete dentures were placed in 18 patients. To prevent ridge resorption, bone grafts with hard tissue replacement synthetic bone were placed in sockets on one side of the mandible. The untreated sockets on the contralateral side served as controls. Bone density as shown in panoramic radiographs was reported at the time of placement, at 5 months to 6 months postsurgery, at 12 months to 14 months postsurgery, and at 20 months to 24 months postsurgery. The sites treated with hard tissue replacement synthetic bone not only prevented ridge resorption but also showed increased optical (socket) density of regenerating bone in the initial phase of the study, and maintained that elevated level at 24 months postextraction.

In separate double-blind trials, prazosin was compared with placebo and with methyldopa and placebo. In both, prazosin was well tolerated and succeeded in lowering blood pressure in patients with mild to moderate hypertension. The mean reductions with methyldopa were greater, but the difference was not statistically significant and a higher percentage of the patients in the prazosin group became normotensive.

CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the use of low molecular weight heparin with unfractionated heparin in people undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. It concluded that the effects on clinical events (death, myocardial infarction or revascularisation) and on bleeding outcomes were similar with both treatments. There was little detail about the methods of the review, but the conclusions appear suitably cautious.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV) for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The authors concluded that NPPV benefits patients with severe exacerbations, but studies found no benefit for milder exacerbations. The authors' conclusions about severe exacerbation are likely to be reliable, but there may have been insufficient evidence to show an effect for nonsevere exacerbations.
In a prospective randomized clinical trial comprising 22 postmenopausal women with backache and a halisteretic spine with crush fracture(s), 12 women completed a 12-week therapy with sodium fluoride, calcium and calciferol and 10 with placebo. A statistically significant improvement (p less than 0.05), evaluated by a four-stage scale on pains, infirmity, and consumption of analgesics, was observed in the actively treated patients.
The efficacy of ciprofloxacin in eradicating pharyngeal colonization of Neisseria meningitidis was studied among army recruits in Finland. Ciprofloxacin (250 mg) or placebo was given twice a day for 2 days to 118 meningococcal carriers. Meningococcal carriage was eradicated in 96% of subjects given ciprofloxacin and in 13% of those given placebos.

30 patients with totally 178 toenails infected with Trichophyton rubrum were randomly treated with ketoconazole alone for 4 months (group A) or in combination with chemical nail avulsion (group B). Of the 14 patients in group A who completed the treatment, 4 (28%) were cured 6 months later, compared to 8 (53%) of 15 patients in group B. In 4 cases, transient elevated hepatofunction enzymes occurred. Gastrointestinal disturbances caused withdrawal in 1 case.

1. The efficacy of three different single doses (600, 900 and 1200 mg of soluble aspirin and aspirin tablets) was determined in a randomized placebo-controlled parallel study in 140 patients (70 females) with postoperative pain after removal of impacted third molars. 2. Patients treated with soluble aspirin 600 mg, 900 mg, 1200 mg and aspirin tablet 1200 mg reported significantly less pain (P less than 0.01) throughout the investigation period than those treated with placebo. 3. Overall pain scores after treatment with aspirin tablets 600 and 900 mg did not differ significantly from those after treatment with placebo (P greater than 0.05). 4. On a comparative dose basis, soluble aspirin was significantly more potent (P less than 0.05) than aspirin tablets.

The analgesic effect of meclofenamate sodium at two dose levels (100 mg and 200 mg) was compared with the effects of buffered aspirin (600 mg) and placebo in a double-blind, randomized study of 105 dental outpatients with acute pain following third-molar extraction. Meclofenamate sodium at either dose level was significantly superior to both buffered aspirin and placebo, resulting in significantly greater relief of pain. All four treatments were well tolerated, and side effects were minimal. Meclofenamate sodium is a safe, highly effective analgesic for the relief of acute pain.

We studied 160 postpartum women having moderate to severe episiotomy pain to determine the efficacy of aspirin analgesia, with 5, 10, and 20 grain doses, as compared to placebo. Over a four-hour period, all groups treated with aspirin showed significantly more improvement in pain intensity scores than those given placebo. Only a small percentage of patients required additional analgesic medication. This study shows that aspirin alone is an effective treatment for relief of moderate to severe episiotomy pain.

The efficacy of aminosidine was compared with sodium stibogluconate in an open, randomized study of parasitologically-proven cutaneous leishmaniasis in Belize. Aminosidine, 14 mg/kg/d (max. 1 g daily) for 20 d, healed 10 of 17 lesions and sodium stibogluconate, 20 mg/kg/d for 20 d, healed 15 of 17 lesions. Lesions caused by Leishmania braziliensis were relatively unresponsive to aminosidine. Aminosidine was well tolerated and toxicity was not observed. Sodium stibogluconate was not well tolerated and treatment was associated with bone marrow suppression and elevation of serum aminotransferases.

Infants (n = 35) with digestive symptom were investigated for diagnosis of cow's milk allergy (CMA). Milk atopy patch tests (APTs) were positive in 19 of 24 CMA versus 1 of 11 in non-CMA patients (P <.001). This sensitivity (79%) and specificity (91%) suggest that the APT could improve the detection of conditions related to CMA.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that evidence suggested stem cell therapy improved heart left ventricular contractibility, but had no effect on left ventricular remodelling in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Given concerns over the possibility of missed studies, the unclear quality of included data and the methods of analysis, the authors' conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that consuming a diet containing polyunsaturated fatty acids instead of saturated fatty acid reduced coronary heart disease events. The search strategy may have excluded relevant studies, data came from older studies (1968 to 1992) and quality appeared generally low. The conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that all pharmacological agents assessed were effective in prevention of any kind of mood episode, but different efficacy profiles were found for prevention of manic and/or depressive relapses. The reliability of the conclusions is uncertain given the potential for publication bias, risk of reviewer error and bias and unclear study quality.
The effect of inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis on diuretic action was examined in patients with ascites due to chronic liver disease and in normal subjects. In patients with ascites, natriuresis after 80 mg i.v. furosemide was reduced 82% by pretreatment with indomethacin. Creatinine clearance was reduced only 16%. These effects were likely due to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis, since urinary prostaglandin E2 fell and there was also reduction in natriuresis with naproxen (52%). The effects were not specific for furosemide since spironolactone-induced natriuresis was also reduced by indomethacin (82%), naproxen (52%), and aspirin (33%). In normal subjects, indomethacin reduced furosemide natriuresis by only 14% while creatinine clearance was not affected. The mechanisms of these drug interactions are uncertain but probably involve renal hemodynamics which appear to be supported importantly by renal prostaglandins in patients with ascites due to liver disease.

The effects of erythropoietin administration on mitral regurgitation in patients with congestive heart failure have not yet been examined. After 2 months, erythropoietin treatment results in a significant reduction in left ventricular volumes and mitral regurgitation severity and improves hemodynamics.
This prospective study examines psychosocial mediators of an efficacious skin self-examination (SSE) intervention that includes provision of a whole-body digital photography book depicting the entire skin surface. Individuals (n = 100) with established risk factors for melanoma were recruited from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Pigmented Lesion Clinic during their initial dermatologist visit and were randomized to receive a photobook immediately (n = 49) or 4 months after intervention delivery (n = 51). Potential mediators included self-efficacy and response efficacy drawn from Social Cognitive Theory, melanoma worry, and SSE anxiety drawn from Self-Regulation Theory, and skin cancer knowledge, and skin awareness. Only self-efficacy was a significant mediator, accounting for 8% of the total effect of photobook enhancement on SSE adherence at 4 months.
The objective of the study was to evaluate the efficacy of intramuscular penicillin: mixture of benzyl penicillin and procain penicillin (2 MU x 2 times daily) and intravenous benzyl penicillin (4 MU x 6 times daily) in the treatment of hospitalized adult patients with erysipelas. A prospective randomized unicentric trial was conducted. In total, 112 patients entered the study; 57 in the intramuscular group and 55 patients in the intravenous group completed the trial. The failure rate was 14% for intramuscular group and 20% for the intravenous group (P = 0.40). Local complications such as of the leg abscesses were observed in the two groups (intravenous 9.1%, intramuscular 7%; P = 0477). Of the patients treated with intravenous benzyl penicillin, 25.5% presented complications related to the route (venitis). Intramuscular penicillin should be considered an effective and well-tolerated treatment of erysipelas in adult patients.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that methylene blue increases vascular resistance and mean arterial pressure in patients with septic shock, but the effects on mortality and oxygen delivery are unknown and further research is required. In view of the limited evidence, incomplete reporting of review methods and lack of a study quality assessment, it is not possible to confirm the reliability of these conclusions.
Since 1989, Beth Israel Hospital has been deploying an extensive online patient record (the OMR), which augmented a heavily used integrated hospital information system. Initially begun in a large primary care practice, the system is now used to share patient records among 36 practices on three campuses. Although the system was intended to eliminate the need for paper, we have found that it has, in the short term, increased the amount of paper produced. Elimination of paper record in ambulatory care has saved us $56,000, but we have yet to realize the savings of an additional $200,000 per year. We explore the factors that contribute to this "paper paradox" and discuss the costs associated with increased paper production, areas in which we have reduced paper handling, and strategies for reducing our reliance on paper.

The pharmacokinetics of cefadroxil suspension were studied in 30 children, 13 months to 12 years of age (mean age, 5.7 years). Average peak concentrations in serum of 11 to 14 mug/ml and of 7 to 10 mug/ml after 15- and 10-mg/kg doses, respectively, were not substantially affected by the feeding status. The serum half-life values were 1.3 to 1.5 h. Cefadroxil was detected in saliva of all children 2 h after 15-mg/kg doses: the levels ranged from 0.17 to 2.6 mug/ml (mean, 0.46 mug/ml). The average concentrations in urine were 1,700 and 2,620 mug/ml at 0 to 2 and 2 to 4 h, respectively, after 15-mg/kg doses. In a randomized controlled study of 50 children with impetigo, cefadroxil was as effective as penicillin G in curing existing lesions and in preventing development of new lesions. Cefadroxil may be useful for therapy of mucocutaneous and urinary tract infections in infants and children.

The rate of cesarean section delivery in the United States has risen from 4.5 per 100 deliveries in 1965 to 17.9 in 1981. The rate is highest in the Northeast, in hospitals of 500 beds or more, in proprietary hospitals, for Blue Cross as a source of payment, and for mothers aged 35 years and over. The rate is lowest in the North Central region, in hospitals with less than 100 beds, in government hospitals, for self-pay patients, and for mothers under 20 years of age.

Bupropion hydrochloride is a dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor which may be an effective treatment for cocaine dependence due to its ability to reverse deficits in dopaminergic functioning that occur in chronic cocaine users. We performed a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled trial comparing outpatient treatment with bupropion (N = 37) and placebo (N = 33) in combination with standard cognitive behavioral therapy. There were no statistically significant differences between bupropion and placebo in treatment outcomes, including aggregate measures of urine drug screen results (Joint Probability Index at 16 weeks: 0.43 for bupropion and 0.38 for placebo), treatment retention, cocaine craving ratings, and assessments of depressive symptoms. The failure to find an effect for bupropion relative to placebo, when combined with standard cognitive behavioral therapy, dampens enthusiasm for future development of bupropion as a cocaine pharmacotherapy.
To test the effectiveness of 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) in the treatment of Crohn's disease, we entered 83 chronically ill patients into a two-year double-blind study comparing 6-MP with placebo. Crossover data showed that improvement occurred in 26 of 39 courses of 6-MP (67%) as compared with three of 39 courses of placebo (8%) (P less than 0.001). Non-crossover data likewise confirmed the superiority of 6-MP. The drug was more effective than placebo in closing fistulas (31 vs 6%) and in permitting discontinuation or reduction of steroid dosage (75 vs. 36%) (P less than 0.001). The onset of response to 6-MP was often delayed, with 32% of patients taking longer than three months to respond, and 19% taking longer than four months. Adverse side effects to 6-MP occurred in 10% of patients and were uniformly reversible. We conclude that 6-MP is an effective and useful agent in the management of Crohn's disease.
Thirty-nine patients with acute low back pain were treated with amitriptyline (150 mg/d) or acetaminophen (2,000 mg/d) in a controlled double-blind design for 5 weeks. Both groups revealed mild depression, normal coping, and increased anxiety at the beginning, with significant improvement in anxiety state and pain at the end of treatment. A repeated measures analysis of variance demonstrated that amitriptyline was more effective than acetaminophen in reducing pain intensity from the second week of treatment. Age and depression were the only significant pretreatment predictors of posttreatment pain. The study evaluates the significance of these findings.
To provide information on the long-debated issue of the value of psychotherapy as an addition to paraprofessional counseling services for opiate addicts receiving methadone maintenance, the authors obtained 12-month follow-up data on 93 such patients randomly assigned to a 6-month course of either paraprofessional drug counseling or counseling plus professional psychotherapy. The psychotherapy patients had a significantly better overall status at 7-month follow-up and also at 12-month follow-up, 6 months after the psychotherapy ended. The authors conclude that psychotherapy can be evaluated by using scientific methods and that it can have measurable and sustained benefits in the treatment of opiate addiction.

The purpose of this study was to determine the extent to which refusal skills and norm setting mediated the impact of a school-based prevention program from the Alcohol Misuse Prevention Study (AMPS) on adolescent alcohol overindulgence. The AMPS is a randomized, pre-post, experimental-control study. Respondents in the present study included 6th through 10th graders (ns ranged from 232 to 371). Structural equation modeling analyses using EQS indicated that norm setting mediated the effect of the intervention on alcohol overindulgence at the 7th through the 8th grade and at the 8th through the 10th grade. In contrast, although the prevention program served to increase refusal skills, refusal skills did not mediate the effect of the program on alcohol misuse.

In this study, 126 clients (87 men, 39 women) entering outpatient alcoholism treatment were assigned randomly to 1 of 3 preparatory conditions: a role induction (RI) session, a motivational interview (MI) session, or a no-preparatory session control group (CG). Clients assigned to the MI preparatory condition attended more treatment sessions and had fewer heavy drinking days during and 12 months after treatment relative to CG clients. Clients assigned to MI, relative to CG clients, also had more abstinent days during treatment and during the first 3 months posttreatment, although this difference was not maintained through the remainder of the 12-month follow-up period. Clients assigned to the RI condition showed no significant advantage over those in the CG condition.

A brief motivational interviewing (MI) intervention was evaluated within the context of an outpatient, cocaine-detoxification program. MI was hypothesized to assist patients in completing the detoxification program and to improve outcomes during subsequent treatment. Participants (N = 105) were randomly assigned to MI or to detox-only conditions. Results indicated that although participants completed the detoxification program at equal rates, completers who received MI increased use of behavioral coping strategies and had fewer cocaine-positive urine samples on beginning the primary treatment. MI patients with lower initial motivation were more likely to complete detoxification.

A narrow band of counties extending along the southeastern Atlantic coast from Jacksonville, Florida to Charleston, South Carolina were found to have excessively high incidence rates for esophageal cancer in non-white males. White males in the same areas have a 30% higher incidence rate for lung cancer but only average incidence rates were found for non-white males. Selenium is considered to decrease cancer risk in the animal model. In this coastal region, a study of 130 cancer patients who developed a malignancy 2-12 years after baseline examination showed no dose response relationship between baseline serum selenium levels and risk of subsequent cancer.

In this paper, we describe the planning of the field trial and the methods used for collecting baseline health and ethnographic data in a rural field study site. We describe the study hypotheses, specific objectives, study design, sample size estimates, selection of study area, community consent, the organization of study teams, review mechanism, financial support and baseline data collection. Baseline population characteristics and vital statistics are presented. The qualitative information on traditional beliefs and practices prevalent in the study area revealed that parents felt powerless about newborn health and sickness. There was an enormous unmet need to reach the home-delivered neonates and their care-givers with the correct knowledge and health-care practices.

Forty-seven infants and children suffering from chronic vomiting or regurgitation, participated in a two-week double-blind trial comparing 1% drops of domperidone, 1% metoclopramide drops or placebo. The dose was 0.3 mg/kg given t.d.s. before meals. Both active medicaments were significantly more effective than placebo in controlling the symptoms and domperidone was also significantly superior to metoclopramide. It is concluded, in view of the good safety margin with domperidone, that this drug could become the treatment of choice in such cases.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that low level laser treatment was potentially effective in treating tendinopathy using recommended doses, but overall evidence was inconclusive. Although the statistical synthesis of results was limited and there was a possibility of missing studies, other parts of the review were well-conducted and the authors' tentative conclusion seems justified.
We evaluated the effects of giving the standard Jamaican government school meal to a class of school children. Unlike many other school-feeding studies, this project was carefully controlled and carried out with undernourished children who had low levels of school attendance and achievement. In spite of this, no improvement was found in the children's nutritional status as reflected by weight for age. However, small benefits were found in attendance and school achievement. These findings remained when sex, age, improvements over the previous term, and the effects of 'benevolent attention' were taken into account.
A program was initiated to provide a free breakfast at a ghetto elementary school. Community support was achieved at the expense of randomization of study subjects. While no significantly greater increase in school attendance or performance was detected in comparison with a control school, none of the students was malnourished and diets of students in the control school were as adequate as those in the breakfast school. Thus, it cannot be concluded that school breakfast programs would not benefit malnourished children or teen-agers who most often go without breakfast.
Trends in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) counselling and antibody testing at a London clinic for sexually transmitted diseases showed substantial changes over a 12 month period. From around 100 a month in the summer of 1986 the numbers of people attending rose substantially to 276 in October 1986 and 475 in November at the time of the campaign in the popular press. They rose further still, to 700, at the time of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) week in March 1987. In April they fell to the levels seen six months previously. Apart from this increase in overall numbers the proportions of women and heterosexual men who were seen increased.
Twenty-six patients with acute supratentorial brain infarction were randomly allocated to double-blind intravenous treatment with the calcium entry blocker flunarizine (12 patients) or placebo (14 patients) within 24 h. CT scan excluded other significant pathology. Impaired consciousness and gaze deviation were more common in the placebo group. Three patients in the treated group (25%) were either dead or severely disabled after 6 months, whereas this occurred in 8 of the 14 (57%) control patients, a difference of 32%. This difference is not statistically significant and there is an uneven distribution of important prognostic variables, however, the confidence limits of the difference (-4% and +68%) suggest that there may be a clinically important effect.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that the evidence suggested that valerian would be effective for a subjective improvement for insomnia, although its effectiveness was not demonstrated with quantitative or objective measurements. The authors' cautious conclusions reflect the evidence presented and are likely to be reliable.
We evaluated the effect of nimodipine (30 mg q.i.d. orally for 14 days) on acute ischemic stroke of mild or moderate severity in a unicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study. Treatment had to be started after CT, within 48 h of infarct in patients with a Mathew scale sum score between 50 and 75. The duration of follow-up was 4 months. Eight of the 60 randomized patients were excluded because of incorrect diagnosis. For the remaining 52 patients, 24 were allocated to nimodipine and 28 to placebo. Analysis of variance and covariance and repeated measurements of the Mathew scale scores showed no difference between the two groups, who had continuous and parallel improvement. There was no recurrent stroke, but 1 control died 4 weeks after stroke. Treatment with nimodipine was well tolerated (hypotension: 1 treated patient, 3 controls; bradycardia: 1 treated patient, 2 controls; sGPT increase: 1 treated patient, 1 control). The lack of efficacy of nimodipine in this study may be due to: (1) the neurologic deficit not being severe enough, or (2) the delay before treatment was too long.
This article describes OSF Healthcare's recent journey in patient safety. It discusses the involvement of its 6 hospitals in collaboration with each other and the Institute for Healthcare Improvement. OSF focused on a strategy for decreasing adverse drug events (ADEs). They worked on impacting 4 major areas: safety culture, high-risk medication, dispensing of medication, and medication reconciliation. By doing this, OSF decreased its rate of ADEs per 1000 units of medication administered from 3.84 to 1.39 over the course of 20 months.
This 4-year prospective randomized study is designed to compare the effectiveness and complication rates of the Nova T and MLCu250 inserted immediately postabortion. At the cut-off date (30 November 1983), all patients in the first cohort of 400 women had completed at least 12 months of use. At this stage of the trial, no significant differences had emerged between the two devices in any of the standard termination categories.
This randomized prospective trial compared the use effectiveness and side effects of the MLCu 250 and MLCu 375 inserted immediately post-abortion. Five-hundred-and-forty-nine patients were followed-up over a two-year period involving 9890 woman-months of use with a loss to follow-up rate of only 5.1%. Both IUDs gave good protection against pregnancy (gross rates at 24 months, 1.8 and 2.1). There were no significant differences between the two devices in pregnancies or other termination events.
The results of 3 years of follow-up of a randomized comparative study of 331 women who had an IUD inserted immediately after a first-trimester legal abortion are presented. In one group of women, 172 Nova-T were inserted and in another, 159 Copper-T 200. There was no statistically significant difference between the two groups, though the pregnancy rate for Nova-T was considerable lower than for Copper-T 200. The overall performance of the IUD equals that in a larger material of more than 1 800 insertions, both post menstrual and post abortal , of which this study is a part.
This paper presents the short term results of an ongoing prospective randomized trial comparing a cemented unipolar with a cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of displaced femoral neck fractures in the elderly. Forty-seven patients with an average age of 77 years completed 6-month followup. Outcomes at 6 weeks, 3 months and 6 months were assessed by completion of a patient oriented hip outcome instrument and by functional tests of walking speed and endurance. No differences in the postoperative complication rates or lengths of hospitalization were seen between the two groups. Patients treated with a bipolar hemiarthroplasty had greater range of hip motion in rotation and abduction and had faster walking speeds. However, no differences in hip rating outcomes were found. These early results suggest that use of the less expensive unipolar prosthesis for hemiarthroplasty after femoral neck fracture may be justified in the elderly.
We performed a randomised prospective trial to compare a cemented unipolar prosthesis (Thompson) with a cemented bipolar prosthesis (Monk) in the treatment of displaced intracapsular fractures of the hip in patients over 80 years of age. Patients with a mental test score of less than 5/13 were excluded but the mortality was still about 30% at one year in both groups. We therefore feel that subjective criteria such as the level of pain and the return to the preinjury state are of paramount importance. Two years after operation there was no statistical difference between the rate of complications in the two groups. After adjusting for confounding factors such as differences in the level of function before injury between the groups, the degree of return to the preinjury state was significantly greater (p = 0.04) when using the unipolar prosthesis, which is one-quarter of the price of the bipolar. We cannot therefore justify the use of an expensive bipolar prosthesis in patients over 80 years of age.
Thirty-two elderly patients with a femoral neck fracture treated by bipolar hemiarthroplasty and 36 patients (matched for age) with an Austin-Moore hemiarthroplasty were followed-up and compared. Bipolar replacement resulted in a higher percentage of satisfactory results, less postoperative pain, greater range of movement, more rapid return to unassisted activity, fewer unsatisfactory results and no acetabular erosion. The device functioned as bipolar in all the cases studied for inner-bearing motion.
A prospective clinical trial has been conducted comparing the use of a hydoxyapatite-coated bipolar hemiarthroplasty and an uncemented bipolar prosthesis in the treatment of displaced subcapital fractures of the femur. The trial was conducted over 1 year, 82 patients suffering displaced subcapital fractures of the femur were included. The patients were followed up for 1 year postoperatively. The functional result was significantly superior in the hydroxyapatite-coated group. Characteristic changes were found on radiographs both proximally and distally, indicating that distal stem fixation with proximal stress shielding had occurred.
We performed a randomised prospective trial to compare the results of 27 cemented and 26 uncemented bipolar hemiarthroplasties in active patients with displaced subcapital fractures of the femoral neck. After a mean follow-up of 17 months, significantly more of the uncemented group were experiencing pain in the hip and using more walking aids than the patients in the cemented group. The incidence of postoperative complications, the early mortality rate and the operating time and blood loss were not significantly different. Using otherwise identical prostheses the early results were much better with a cemented Thompson stem than with an uncemented Austin Moore stem.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the ability of Amino-Cerv to promote healing of the cervix following loop electrical excision procedure (LEEP) of the cervix for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. STUDY DESIGN: A randomized study was conducted on 48 women in a private office setting. Patients were divided into two groups, to use or not use Amino-Cerv intravaginally for two weeks after the procedure. Statistical analysis of the findings were performed using the chi 2 test. RESULTS: Twenty of 24 (83%) of women using Amino-Cerv had completely healed tissue at four weeks, whereas 12 of 24 (50%) in the untreated group had healed tissue at four weeks. Findings were not statistically significant at two weeks but were statistically significant (P < .005, power = .55) at four weeks after the procedure. CONCLUSION: Amino-Cerv after LEEP of the cervix promotes healing.
Two methods of obtaining hemostasis after cold knife cone biopsy were compared in a prospective randomized trial involving 200 patients. One method relied primarily on hemostatic sutures, and the other involved the use of a styptic solution (Monsel's solution) and vaginal pack, thus avoiding the use of sutures altogether. The short- and long-term morbidity in these two groups were compared and 12-month follow-up was completed. The use of sutures did not reduce the incidence of primary hemorrhage. Secondary hemorrhage was twice as frequent in the suture group, although this trend did not quite reach statistical significance. During long-term follow-up, significantly more patients in the suture group developed menstrual symptoms, cervical stenosis, and unsatisfactory colposcopy, requiring further operative intervention as a result.
Fifty women undergoing laser vaporization of the cervix for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia were randomly allocated to one of two groups. In one group the patients received no anaesthesia, in the other the ectocervix was infiltrated with 2 ml of Citanest with Octapressin (prilocaine 3% with 0.03 i.u./ml. of felypressin) immediately before the procedure. The pain experienced by each group was assessed immediately after treatment by visual analogue and verbal rating scales. The pain experienced by those women receiving local anaesthesia was significantly reduced as assessed by the visual analogue scale (P = 0.011) and this reduction was not quite significant by the verbal rating scale (P = 0.06). The Citanest group had less troublesome bleeding but the difference in bleeding between the two groups was not significant.
One hundred forty patients who underwent laser conization and 220 patients who underwent laser miniconizations were prospectively randomized into two study groups. One treatment group was given antifibrinolytic therapy in the form of tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron, KabiVitrum, Sweden) intraoperatively and for 14 days postoperatively. The other group did not receive antifibrinolytic therapy. In the group of 68 patients with laser conizations who were given antifibrinolytic therapy, no postoperative hemorrhages occurred, whereas there were eight such hemorrhages in 72 conizations (11%) in the untreated patients. This difference is statistically significant (P = .004, Fisher exact test for two proportions). Also, for laser miniconization, the frequency of postoperative hemorrhage was almost halved, from 9.1% in 110 patients not receiving antifibrinolytic therapy to 5.5% in the 110 treated patients. The use of lateral cervical sutures did not reduce the frequency of postoperative hemorrhage at laser conization in the present study.
To evaluate the inhibitory effect of tranexamic acid (AMCA) on increased fibrinolyctical activity in connection with conisatio colli uteri we have carried out a randomized, double-blind study with patients operated upon partly with an open method of operation (80 patients) and partly with modified Sturmdorff sutures (150 patients). In connection with the open method the frequency of late bleeding decreased from 17.5% to 2.5%, which is significant. The corresponding decrease in connection with the other method was from 10.7% to 4.1%. This material was not sufficiently large to verify significance. The side effects of the prophylactic treatment with AMCA were few. The study indicates that AMCA affords good protection against late bleeding in conisatio colli uteri.
OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to compare the diagnostic ability and treatment efficacy of conization by the loop electrosurgical excision procedure with cold-knife conization. STUDY DESIGN: One hundred eighty women who required conization for diagnosis and treatment of cervical dysplasia or microinvasive cervical carcinoma were prospectively enrolled in a randomized clinical trial to receive either cold-knife conization or conization by the loop electrosurgical excision procedure. Conization complications, rate of lesion clearance, and therapeutic outcome were assessed for the 2 study groups. RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences in the complication rate (P = 1.00), the rate of lesion clearance (P =.18), or the rate of disease recurrence (P =.13) between the 2 study groups. The mean follow-up was 11.2 months in the cold-knife conization group and 10.4 months in the loop-excision conization group. CONCLUSION: Cold-knife conization and loop-excision conization yield similar diagnostic and therapeutic results.
Fifty-five patients were randomized in a double-blinded manner to large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) (29 patients) or radical cervical diathermy with fulgaration (RCDF) (26 patients) for treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Patients completed a 2-month diary of symptoms and completed a 10-week postoperative questionnaire. White vaginal discharge lasted 7.3 (4.6) days (SD) for RCDF compared to 3.4 (1.6) days (SD) for LLETZ. There was no significant difference in any other symptoms on analysis This appears to be the first report clearly assessing the length and severity of postoperative symptoms following LLETZ or RCDF. There is no reason on length and severity of postoperative symptoms to choose 1 of these 2 treatment methods over the other.
In a randomized study, 204 patients with exocervical intra-epithelial neoplasia were allocated to either laser evaporation (103) or cryocoagulation (101). The patients were treated on an outpatient basis without anesthesia. In the case of initial treatment failure the same method was to be used for retreatment. One hundred and eighty-seven patients were followed-up for an average of 50 months (12-80). Eighty-six of 94 laser-evaporated patients (91%) and 89 of 93 cryocoagulated patients (96%) were cured after one treatment. Five of 8 laser failures and 3 of 4 cryo failures were cured by retreatment. The cure rate after one or two laser evaporations was 97% (91 of 94 patients), and after one or two cryo coagulations, 99% (92 of 93 patients). Eighty per cent of residual or recurrent neoplasia occurred within 15 months and 96% within 2 years of treatment. No invasive neoplasia occurred during the follow-up period and no tendency was seen towards higher grades of intra-epithelial neoplasia in the failures compared with the initial diagnoses. It is concluded that laser evaporation and cryocoagulation are equally effective for the treatment of exocervical intra-epithelial neoplasia.
One hundred patients with histologically confirmed cervical intraepithelial neoplasia suitable for ablative therapy were randomly allocated to treatment by either laser vaporization or laser excision conization under local anesthesia in the outpatient colposcopy clinic. The two methods were compared with respect to the immediate surgical complications, ease of performance, and long-term complications. They were comparable in most respects, and both were well accepted by the patients. Laser excision had the added advantage of providing further material for histologic examination to confirm the absence of invasion and the completeness of excision of the lesion.
In a randomized trial concerning 123 women with CIN, 59 were treated with laser conization under colposcope without further hemostatic remedy and 64 with cold knife conization guided by Schiller's iodine dyeing supported by side sutures, vaginal packing and postoperative oral administration of tranexam acid. Follow-up with colposcopy and cytology was done 3 and 12 weeks post-conization and then every 6 months. The average follow-up period was 36 months (28-48). Peroperative bleeding was rather less pronounced in the laser group. Postoperatively, however, bleeding requiring treatment was significantly less common in the laser group (5%) than in the cold knife group (17%). The recurrence rate of CIN was 7% in the laser group and 10% in the knife group. Stenosis of the cervical canal developed in 7% of the patients in the laser group and in 3.5% in the knife group. After 12 weeks the squamocolumnar junction was visible in its full extent in 66% of the laser treated patients compared with 38% of the cold knife treated patients. It is concluded that laser conization is a safe procedure even without hemostatic procedures other than the coagulation abilities of the laser beam itself, as used in this work.
The results of laser and cryosurgical treatment in 106 patients with histologically proven carcinoma in situ of the uterine cervix (CIN III) are presented. Seventy-one patients were treated with the laser and in 63 of these further follow-up with colposcopy and cytology failed to show any abnormality. This represents an initial success rate of 89%. In 8 patients (11%) initial treatment was considered to have failed because of persistent dyskaryotic smears and histological evidence of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN II-III). Six of these patients were treated successfully with a further laser application and two patients had conization. The overall success rate for the laser was 97%. Thirty-five patients were treated with cryosurgery and subsequent follow-up was negative in 29 of these patients (83%). The 6 treatment failures (17%) were subsequently successfully treated with local destructive therapy (4 with cryosurgery, 1 with laser, and 1 with needle diathermy). The overall success rate for cryofreezing was 94.2%. In cases of CIN III the laser is more likely to achieve eradication of the lesion with a single application than cryofreezing.
A randomized study was performed to compare efficacy and side effects of laser and cryotherapy: 51 patients were treated with laser vaporization and 50 patients with cryotherapy. Success rates for laser and cryotherapy were not significantly different. Success rates were significantly related to lesion size. Grade of CIN, positive endocervical curettage, parity, and age at treatment were not found to be related. Vaginal discharge, both in duration and amount, was significantly less in patients treated with laser vaporization, compared with cryotherapy, but pain and bleeding occurred more often in patients treated with laser vaporization. A brief review of possible sources of bias in comparative studies on laser and cryotherapy is given, indicating the preference for a randomized study. It is concluded that widespread introduction of laser facilities in smaller centers is not justified, because the success rates are not better than those of cryotherapy, and because the advantages of less discharge are outweighed by the high cost.
Two hundred patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia were treated alternately by cryotherapy and carbon dioxide laser therapy on an outpatient basis after appropriate triage with colposcopy, cervical biopsy, and endocervical curettage. Results of treatment were not significantly different from one another, with failure occurring in 7% of patients treated with cryotherapy and 11% of those treated with carbon dioxide laser therapy. The cryotherapeutically treated patients had less pain but more discharge than those treated by the carbon dioxide laser. The laser patients' cervices healed more rapidly than did the cervices treated with cryotherapy. There appears to be no advantage in replacing cryotherapy with carbon dioxide laser therapy.
A controlled study of the effects of ultrasound on healing chronic leg ulcers was carried out in conjunction with standard treatment on 38 patients divided randomly into two groups. All patients received standard treatment (paste impregnated bandage and a self-adhesive elastic bandage plus placebo ultrasound or ultrasound (1.0 watt/cm2 at 1 MHz, for 10 min) twice weekly for 8 weeks. Percentage healed ulcer area and number of healed ulcers were compared after 2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks. There were no significant differences in the proportion of healed ulcers or ulcer area in the ultrasound group as compared with the placebo group.
A controlled study of the effects of pulsed ultrasound was carried out in conjunction with a standard treatment for healing chronic leg ulcers on 44 patients divided randomly into two groups. All patients received standard treatment (paste impregnated bandage and a self-adhesive elastic bandage) plus placebo-ultrasound or pulsed ultrasound (1:9, 0.5 watt/cm2 at 1 MHz, for 10 min) 3 days a week for 4 weeks, thereafter twice weekly for 4 weeks and once weekly for the following 4 weeks. Percentage healed ulcer area and comparison of percentage healed ulcers were examined after 4, 8 and 12 weeks. There were no significant differences in the proportion of healed ulcers or ulcer area in the pulsed ultrasound group as compared with the placebo group.
In a controlled trial to ascertain whether ultrasound given weekly in conjunction with a standard treatment for chronic leg ulcers improves the rate of healing 56 patients were randomised to standard treatment (paste impregnated bandage and a self-adhesive elastic bandage) and 52 to standard treatment plus pulsed ultrasound given weekly. After 12 weeks the proportion of ulcers healed was 20% greater in the ultrasound than in the control group.
The effect of azathioprine in patients with active Crohn's disease has been evaluated in a double-blind cross-over trial. Fifteen patients were treated with both azathioprine and placebo: only two improved while on azathioprine, six got worse, and in seven there was no change. The drug seemed to be the cause of deterioration in two of the patients. Although the drug may be of some value in a few patients, it should be used with caution and only when other measures have failed.
In a previous study we showed that moderate to severe stress during pregnancy was inversely related to infant birth weight. Using the same criteria for stress (according to the Social Readjustment Rating Scale of Holmes and Rahe), we studied 86 white mothers with singleton pregnancies and with no known medical or obstetric risk factors for reduced birth weight. After strict randomization, data were analyzed for 43 mothers who received psychosocial support between enrollment at +/- 20 weeks and delivery at +/- 38 weeks and for 43 control mothers who received standard care at the antenatal clinic. In the supported group seven infants weighed less than 3000 gm at birth versus 18 control infants (p = 0.008), and analysis revealed that this effect was more the result of improved intrauterine growth than of prolongation of pregnancy. These findings are of little clinical relevance as far as the neonate is concerned, but they do indicate that psychosocial support has a significant effect on birth weight. It is possible that previous studies that have looked only for an effect on low- or very-low-birth-weight rates might have missed this clinically measurable benefit of counseling.
Women's feelings and beliefs about low birth weight (LBW) were obtained by postal questionnaire completed postnatally by 467 women who had participated in a randomised controlled trial of social support in pregnancy. All the women in the study had previously given birth to a LBW baby. Differences were found between beliefs about causes of LBW in general and in the women's explanations for their own LBW baby. These ambiguities were particularly noticeable in relation to smoking beliefs. The women's views on medical care; the practical and emotional problems of low birth weight; and the solutions to some of those problems are discussed. The need for more support from health professionals was given top priority. The main needs of women with a 'high risk' pregnancy were more reassurance and information, recognition of the economic hardships that can be caused, and more attention to their feelings and opinions.
Data relating to infant feeding practices were obtained by a 6 week postnatal questionnaire from 459 women who participated in a randomised controlled trial of social support in pregnancy. They represented a 90% response rate from 507 women with a past history of a low birth weight baby before the index pregnancy. Thirty-nine per cent of the babies weighing more than 2500 g were breast fed completely. Women who experienced a delay of more than half an hour between birth and first suckling, and those who were given pethidine during labour breast fed for a shorter period, as did those who gave complementary bottle feeds. By considering the women's reasons for discontinuing or not initiating breast feeding, this paper suggests that improved social support from health professionals and others in the postnatal period can increase breast feeding success rates.
A preliminary randomized study has been made of a domiciliary management scheme which incorporates telephonic fetal heart rate monitoring for women with high-risk pregnancies. In this paper we report effects of the scheme on the pattern of hospital admissions. Sixty women were randomized 2:1 for domiciliary surveillance or for conventional hospital care, with 40 and 17 records finally available for analysis. The groups were well matched for maternal, obstetric and socio-economic characteristics. In the domiciliary group, 21 (53%) of the women avoided hospital admission altogether, the admission rate was more than halved, and the mean proportion of the time spent in hospital was reduced from 50% to 16% of the observation period. The women who received domiciliary care were generally satisfied with the scheme. Our study confirms expectations that carefully planned domiciliary surveillance can reduce the number and duration of hospital admissions.
A pilot scheme was introduced in Manchester to provide additional social support to pregnant women at above average risk of giving birth to a low-birthweight baby. The help of lay workers, known as family workers, was made available to eligible women. The effect on infant birthweight of offering the help of a family worker was assessed by a randomized controlled trial. No significant differences were observed between the experimental and control group, but on a number of grounds the interpretation of this finding is not straightforward, and further research is recommended.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of domiciliary care of pathological pregnancies by midwives a comparative study was carried out on two groups of pregnant women, the one group being treated by this new method of caring fort them, the other by traditional care. There was random selection for the two groups. The results of this comparative controlled study show that when midwives care for these patients at home once a pathological condition has become established premature labour and admission to hospital is not avoided. A more preventive attitude developed. This implies that they intervene very early in pregnancy as soon as risk factors for pathological conditions appear without waiting for the pathological conditions themselves to develop.
Women suffer a significant degree of perineal morbidity in the postpartum period. For some, it can be significant and interfere with daily activities. Although there seems to be no doubt that polyglycolic acid derivatives are superior to non absorbable sutures with regard to wound healing, problems still occur with their use. In this study a relatively new product, Vicryl rapide, was compared with Vicryl.
Glycerol-impregnated chromic catgut and untreated chromic catgut were compared in a randomized controlled trial involving 737 consecutive women who required repair of perineal trauma following spontaneous vaginal delivery. Medical staff preference was equally divided between the two materials. More untreated chromic catgut sutures required removal both by 10 days and by 3 months postpartum. Women whose perineal trauma was repaired with glycerol-impregnated chromic catgut were 10% more likely to have perineal pain at 10 days and 33% more likely to suffer from dyspareunia in the 3 months following delivery. The high rates of maternal morbidity associated with glycerol-impregnated chromic catgut appear to preclude its use for perineal repair.
Polyglycolic acid (PGA) sutures and traditional catgut were compared in 190 patients undergoing episiotomy. Each group was also randomly allocated to a double blind comparison of therapy with oral proteolytic enzymes (Chymoral) and placebo. The combination of Chymoral and polyglycolic acid sutures was shown to reduce the level of pain, assessed subjectively, and there was a significant reduction in analgesic requirements in the Chymoral/PGA group.
A randomized experimental design was used to assign participants to an integrated mental health and substance use treatment program or to standard hospital treatment. A multilevel, nonlinear model was used to estimate hospital treatment effects on days of alcohol use for persons with serious mental illness and substance use disorders over 18 months. The integrated treatment program had a significant effect on the rate of alcohol use at 2 months postdischarge, reducing the rate of use by 54%. Motivation for sobriety at hospital discharge, posttreatment self-help attendance, and social support for sobriety were also found to reduce the rate of use during the follow-up period. Implications for mental health treatment and aftercare support are discussed.
Many individuals with serious mental illnesses have co-occurring drug and alcohol problems. The research reported in this article examined an integrated inpatient mental illness-chemical dependency program and compared it with standard inpatient psychiatric treatment for two groups: those demonstrating high change from baseline to two-months postdischarge and those with negative or no change. Univariate analyses revealed significant differences in the change groups on baseline personal-clinical characteristics and on aspects of their social and physical environments. The results have implications for improving mental health practice by better predicting patients who will optimally benefit from inpatient treatment.
BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to compare specific causes of death in Type 2 diabetic patients attending and not attending the diabetes center. METHODS: The study was carried out within the framework of the Verona Diabetes Study, a population-based survey of known diabetes prevalence with a 10-year mortality follow-up. On 31 December 1986, 7148 Type 2 diabetic patients were identified in Verona, north-east Italy. Among them 4047 regularly attended the diabetes center, while 3101 did not attend the diabetes center. On 31 December 1996, life status was determined and the underlying cause of death was coded according to the ICD-9. During the follow-up, 2896 subjects died. Difference in mortality from specific causes between attenders and non-attenders were evaluated by a Cox model, controlling for sex, age, diabetes treatment and place of residence (downtown vs suburbs). RESULTS: Mortality was lower in subjects who attended the diabetes center (38. 6% vs 43.0%, p<0.001). This phenomenon was mainly due to lower cardiovascular (p=0.002) and digestive (p=0.047) mortality. CONCLUSIONS: These data support the conclusion that attending the diabetes center reduces cardiovascular and, to a lesser extent, digestive mortality.
The entire population of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients in Denmark diagnosed in the period January 1, 1945, to June 30, 1985, comprised 514 persons of whom 62 were diagnosed at autopsy. Of the remaining 452 patients, 372 were probands and 80 were secondary cases. The effect of a centralized treatment on the prognosis was evaluated using a Cox's regression model. Furthermore an incidence analysis was performed using probands including autopsies. Centralized treatment had a significantly beneficial effect on the prognosis (p = 0.02), the death intensity (hazard rate) being decreased by a factor of 0.60. It was calculated that at present 1 out of 4,760 newborn Danes may be diagnosed as suffering from CF before the age of 15 years, and 3% of the Danish population are heterozygotes for CF.
Described an examination of data collected 2 years following the onset of a media-based, worksite smoking cessation intervention. Thirty-eight companies in Chicago were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions. In the initial 3-week phase, all participants in both conditions received self-help manuals and were instructed to watch a 20-day televised series designed to accompany the manual. In addition, participants in the group (G) condition received six sessions emphasizing quitting techniques and social support. In the second phase, which continued for 12 months, employees in G participated in monthly peer-led support groups and received incentives, while participants in the nongroup (NG) condition received no further treatment. Twenty-four months after pretest, 30% of employees in G were abstinent compared to only 19.5% in NG. This study is one of the few experimentally controlled worksite smoking cessation interventions to demonstrate significant program differences 2 years following the initial intervention.
BACKGROUND: This 5-year study of the Dow Chemical Texas Operations 1984-1985 Smoking Cessation Incentive Program (SCIP) evaluated the smoking habits of 1,097 participants and 1,174 nonparticipants. RESULTS: We observed, via questionnaire and saliva cotinine data, that participants were 2.3 times more likely to be long-term (greater than or equal to 5 years) nonusers of tobacco than nonparticipants (10.2% vs 4.4%, P less than or equal to 0.01). However, smoking cessation rates for 3-4 years, 1-2 years, and less than 1 year were similar for participants who remained smokers at the conclusion of SCIP and nonparticipants. Age and the interaction between the management job category and having quit smoking for at least 30 days sometime prior to the worksite program were important predictors of smoking cessation among participants. Thirty-six percent of the participants who were considered exsmokers of 6 months duration at the conclusion of the program in 1985 remained long-term quitters 5 years later. Stress and enjoyment of smoking were the two most important reasons provided by participants for recidivism. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this 5-year evaluation demonstrate the heterogeneity of employee participation and success with a worksite smoking cessation program.
We evaluated a worksite smoking cessation program that employed multicomponents including support groups, incentives, and competition. The combination of incentives and other components increased participation rates to over 80%. Forty-two percent of smokers were abstinent at six months, compared to 13 percent of a control group (difference 29 percent, 95% CI 9, 49).
The Quit and Win Challenge, an incentive-based intervention, was implemented in two counties in Eastern Ontario to encourage adult smokers to quit smoking. Participants (n = 231) were compared with adult smokers selected at random (n = 385) from a larger, four-county area. Baseline characteristics were assessed by telephone interview, including socio-demographic and smoking-related factors. Follow-up interviews were also conducted by telephone. Initial and follow-up response rates were high (over 84%) in both groups. Compared with the random survey group, Quit and Win participants tended to be younger, more educated, employed and heavier smokers, with fewer friends or co-workers who smoked. After one year, 19.5% of them reported that they were smoke-free, whereas less than 1% of the random group had achieved cessation. This translates into an impact rate of 0.17%, affecting 1 in 588 adult smokers. With the exception of the smokers' baseline "stage of change," none of the socio-demographic or smoking factors was predictive of cessation. We conclude that this intervention achieved only limited success and attracted certain sectors of the community disproportionately, i.e. smokers who were highly motivated to quit. We argue that increased access to proven cessation therapies would improve the impact of such interventions.
The current study evaluated the effectiveness of widely used self-help materials for quitting smoking. Five hundred and seventy smokers volunteered during a baseline survey to participate in the evaluation. After random assignment, 200 were mailed National Cancer Institute (NCI) "Quit for Good" materials, 200 the Minnesota "Quit and Win" program, and the remaining 170 were assigned to a nonintervention control condition. Results at 7-month follow-up failed to indicate treatment effects either for abstinence or for reported quit attempts. A number of smokers quit prior to the mailing of self-help materials, suggesting that a telephone prompt in itself may have been an important stimulus to cessation. Overall abstinence at follow-up was 10%. Contrary to expectation, successful participants were less likely to use a number of specific preparation strategies for quitting. The results are instructive in providing a large-scale assessment of self-help materials in a population of smokers that was not specifically seeking treatment.
Until August 2, 1997, The Eye Hospital-Gaza (EH) provided both primary and secondary eye services to almost 1 million inhabitants in Gaza. This exerted a tremendous load on the hospital's facilities and prevented the hospital from performing its main role as a secondary eye care provider. The training and guidance of primary health care (PHC) providers are essential in order that they can do their share in eye care. A prevention of blindness awareness campaign, training, workshops, and practical instruction took place in Gaza over a three-year span. A new purpose designed referral system was started on August 2, 1997, that resulted in a great change and improvement of the services in the hospital. Primary eye care is an integral part of ophthalmic services. Proper continuous training of PHC providers is essential, not only for providing service to patients near their residence in the shortest time possible, but also to facilitate the smooth, effective, and efficient functioning of the hospital as a secondary and tertiary eye care provider. We believe the system and methodology used is efficient and reproducible in many developing countries.
Innovative approaches to patient management are needed to ensure that only those patients who would benefit most are referred from primary to secondary care. This report describes an exploratory study in which general practitioners adopted the role of reviewing the management of patients who would otherwise be referred to hospital. Patients in eight general practices in South Wales were referred In-house by general practitioners to a colleague in the practice who reviewed the need for hospital care. Qualitative data from interviews and questionnaires is presented. In-house referral appears to be acceptable, practical and of value to both general practitioners and patients.
This paper is a report of the results of a demonstration designed to provide empirical evidence regarding the effects of alternative approaches to paying physicians for serving children in the Medicaid program: (1) visit fees set at twice regular Medicaid fees in return for physician agreement to manage utilization and (2) capitation and financial risk-sharing along with the same physician agreement to manage utilization. Participating physicians were assigned randomly to either of the two payment groups. Comparisons of utilization and expenditures were made between these two plans and the regular Medicaid program (fee-for-service, low fees). Results showed no adverse effect of capitation payments on primary care visits to office-based physicians. Capitation physician referrals to specialists decreased relative to all other groups studied, consistent with the theory that the financial incentives in capitation will lead primary care physicians to reduce referrals to specialists.
Diarrhea is the second leading cause of death among infants and young children in the developing world. This project investigated whether therapeutic infant massage could reduce diarrheal episodes and decrease overall illness of infants. Infants living in 2 orphanages in Quito, Ecuador, were matched by age and randomly assigned to an experimental or a control condition. The experimental group received an intervention, daily infant massage therapy by orphanage staff or volunteers, which lasted an average of 53 days, and symptoms of illness data were documented daily by volunteers in the orphanages. Results indicated that control group infants had a 50% greater risk of having diarrhea than experimental infants (rate ratio [RR] = 1.54, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.18, 2.03, P < 0.001). Control group infants were also 11% more likely than experimental infants to experience illness of any kind (RR = 1.11, 95% CI = 0.96, 1.28, P = 0.17). The implications for the use of therapeutic infant massage, a remarkably inexpensive intervention, are discussed, and the need for further research is highlighted.
SETTING: Farms in the Boland health district, Western Cape Province, South Africa. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of lay health workers (LHWs) on tuberculosis (TB) control among permanent farm workers and farm dwellers in an area with particularly high TB prevalence. DESIGN: Pragmatic, unblinded cluster randomised control trial. METHODS: This trial measured successful treatment completion rates among new smear-positive (NSP) adult TB patients on 106 intervention farms, and compared them with outcomes in patients on 105 control farms. Farms were the unit of randomisation, and analysis was by intention to treat. RESULTS: A total of 164 adult TB patients were recruited into the study, 89 of whom were NSP. The successful treatment completion rate in NSP adult TB patients was 18.7% higher (P = 0.042, 95%CI 0.9-36.4) on farms in the intervention group than on farms in the control group. Case finding for adult NSP TB cases was 8% higher (P = 0.2671) on farms in the intervention group compared to the control group. CONCLUSION: Trained LHWs were able to improve the successful TB treatment rate among adult NSP TB patients in a well-established health service, despite reduction of services.
Over a period of 6 months the effect of home visits on compliance with directly observed therapy, short course (DOTS), was studied on 480 new smear-positive tuberculosis patients who had delayed collecting their drugs on one occasion. Patients registered at 15 tuberculosis treatment centres in Baghdad, Iraq, were randomized to an intervention group (receiving home visits from trained personnel) or a control group. Home visits were highly effective in improving the return to treatment of patients who were late for treatment (231/240, 96.3%). The intervention group showed a higher treatment success rate (94.2% versus 76.7%), lower default rate (0.8% versus 10.0%) and higher smear conversion rate after the end of treatment (92.9% versus 75.0%) than controls. Home visiting by trained personnel significantly improves patient compliance with DOTS.
Tuberculosis (TB) has reappeared as a serious public health problem. Non-compliance to antituber-culous drug treatment is cited as one of the major obstacles to the containment of the epidemic. Compliance may be optimized by Directly Observed Treatment (DOT) and short-course treatment regimens. Since 1986, Tanzanian TB patients have received daily DOT at health facilities for the first 2 months of the treatment course. However, adherence and cure rates have been falling as the number of TB cases continues to increase and the burden on already stretched health facilities threatens to become unmanageable. We used an open cluster randomized controlled trial to compare community-based DOT (CBDOT) using a short-course drug regimen with institutional-based DOT (IBDOT). A total of 522 (301 IBDOT and 221 CBDOT) patients with sputum-positive TB were recruited. Overall, there was no significant difference in conversion and cure rates between the two strategies [M-H pooled odds ratio (OR) 0.62; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.23, 1.71 and OR = 1.58; 95% CI 0.32, 7.88, respectively] suggesting that CBDOT may be a viable alternative to IBDOT. CBDOT may be particularly useful in parts of the country where people live far from health facilities.
A 1-year randomized trial compared intensive case management (ICM) versus basic case management (BCM) in facilitating early intervention (EI) service use among children in an urban health system. Of 159 participating families with delayed or at-risk preschool-aged children, 88 received ICM from paraprofessionals versus 71 families who received less comprehensive BCM from a nurse. In the ICM versus BCM group, a shorter interval to assessment (98 vs 140 d, p =.05) but similar assessment rate (86% vs 80%, p =.29) was observed. The ICM group had more services recommended per child (1.64 vs 1.16, p < .004) and initiated (1.20 vs 0.85, p < .04). There was no difference in median time to EI program initiation for ICM versus BCM (228 vs 200 d, p = .88) or initiation and visit compliance rate for EI services. Specific efforts to improve outcomes (e.g., decrease initiation time and increase use of EI services) are still needed.
Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), the second member of the ATP-binding cassette membrane transporter family, has a single nucleotide polymorphism, C421A (resulting in Q141K), that is of functional importance. Our aim was to explore the relationship between this polymorphism of the BCRP gene and the risk of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) development. For a case-control study, DNA samples from 200 nonpapillary RCC patients and 200 healthy control subjects were analyzed using the TaqMan technique. The genotypic frequencies of the BCRP C421A polymorphism were compared between RCC patients and control subjects. The frequency of the C/C genotype was significantly higher in RCC patients than in control subjects (age- and gender-adjusted OR = 1.96, 95% CI 1.32-2.93). No associations were observed between the BCRP C421A polymorphism and clinicopathologic or epidemiologic factors, including age, gender, tumor grade, stage, cigarette smoking, family history of cancer and body mass index. Carriers with the C/C genotype of the BCRP C421A polymorphism are at risk of developing nonpapillary RCC. These data suggest that BCRP is a candidate RCC susceptibility gene.

Examined the moderating effects of risk status on the impact of home intervention in a follow-up study of children with failure-to-thrive (FTT). Two types of risk (demographic and maternal negative affectivity) and two levels of intervention were examined. In this randomized clinical trial, all children received services in a multidisciplinary growth and nutrition clinic, and half the children also received home visits from a lay home visitor for 1 year. There were no effects of demographic risk, maternal negative affectivity, or intervention status on child outcome at the close of the home intervention. However, at age 4, more than 1 year after the home intervention ended, there were effects of the home intervention on motor development among all children and on cognitive development and behavior during play among children of mothers who reported low levels of negative affectivity. Results highlight the importance of conducting follow-up assessments in the evaluation of home intervention services, and suggest that among low-SES families of children with FTT, home intervention may be most useful among mothers with low negative affectivity.
The authors tested a 12-week parent training program with parents (n = 208) and teachers (n = 77) of 2-3-year-olds in day care centers serving low-income families of color in Chicago. Eleven centers were randomly assigned to 1 of 4 conditions: (a) parent and teacher training (PT + TT), (b) parent training (PT), (c) teacher training (TT), and (d) waiting list control (C). After controlling for parent stress, PT and PT + TT parents reported higher self-efficacy and less coercive discipline and were observed to have more positive behaviors than C and TT parents. Among toddlers in high-risk behavior problem groups, toddlers in the experimental conditions showed greater improvement than controls. Most effects were retained 1 year later. Benefits were greatest when parents directly received training.
The effectiveness of a brief parental-education program for 40 families with very young children was studied. Families were assigned to either a parental-education or waiting-list control group. The parental-education program included information and strategies drawn from developmental and cognitive psychology and social learning theory. Analysis showed that participating parents significantly reduced their use of corporal and verbal punishment, changed their parenting attitudes, and improved their perceptions of their children's behavior in comparison to the control group. Effects were maintained at six weeks follow-up. Results supported tailoring parental-education programs to the unique needs of participants.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that intensive statin treatment offers greater benefits than standard-dose treatment, mainly for nonfatal cardiovascular events. The review appears to support the authors' conclusions, but the poor reporting of review methods and the lack of an assessment of study quality mean that the reliability of the conclusions is uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that any reductions in second-hand smoke exposure levels in public settings would ultimately lead to improvements in the general health of children in private settings but smoke-free home policies would have additional benefits. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution given the limited methodological rigour of included studies. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the hepatic side-effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in patients with arthritis. The authors concluded that NSAIDs did not increase liver-related serious adverse effects, hospitalisation or death, but diclofenac and rofecoxib increased aminotransferase elevations compared with placebo and other NSAIDs examined. The conclusions were drawn from indirect comparisons, hence they may not be robust.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conduced review assessed the incidence of peri-operative bleeding complications attributable to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in patients undergoing tonsillectomy. Although it was unclear whether NSAIDs increased the incidence of bleeding following tonsillectomy, it was suggested that they should be cautiously used until further studies are conducted. The authors' conclusion and recommendations for further research are appropriate.
This article aims to review, in a systematic manner, the current published evidence base for nurse-initiated thrombolysis. Reasons for this evolution in nursing practice are outlined. Themes emerging from the review are identified. Methodological issues are discussed. This article outlines a conceptual framework for practice evolution. Further research is needed to improve the strength of the evidence base by studies with improved design.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the use of subglottic secretion drainage in the prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia. The authors concluded that, compared with no drainage, drainage reduces the incidence of pneumonia by half in mechanically ventilated patients. The authors' conclusions about the efficacy of subglottic secretion drainage appear to be supported by the evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of non-curricular interventions for increasing physical activity in children and adolescents. The authors concluded that physical activity can be increased during break periods, through existing organisations, summer day camps and perhaps using active transportation. The limited search, poor reporting of the methods and lack of a quality assessment mean that the conclusions are not robust.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed whether intra-articular non-narcotic adjuvants improved the duration of analgesia after arthroscopic knee surgery. The authors concluded that intra-articular clonidine and ketorolac may reduce post-operative pain. Overall, the authors' conclusions are consistent with the evidence reviewed, but the magnitude of any treatment effect is unclear given the lack of detail reported in the results.
CRD SUMMARY: The review investigated the effects of non-pharmacological interventions in cognitively impaired and demented elderly patients. The authors concluded that it was likely that these interventions have beneficial effects. The conclusion is reliable, but most of the reported treatment effects were small and most of the included studies were of limited quality.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of oestrogen replacement therapy (ERT) on articular cartilage in postmenopausal women. The authors concluded that there was weak evidence to suggest that ERT may protect against large joint osteoarthritis. However, a negative effect was seen on cartilage volume in postmenopausal women. The review conclusions are unlikely to be robust given concerns about the review methodology and the poor quality of the studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of steroid withdrawal from triple therapy with cyclosporine or tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil. The authors concluded that steroid withdrawal increases acute rejection but not early graft failure. Given the limitations of the review, and the poor reporting of some review methodology, it is not possible to guarantee the reliability of the conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed cilostazol, beraprost sodium and prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) for treating intermittent claudication to improve walking distance. The authors concluded that cilostazol and PGE1 are effective, but further studies ofberaprost sodium are needed. A narrow literature search limits the reliability of these conclusions.
OBJECTIVE: Psychotherapy instructors have used video technology to train residents for over 40 years. Though it has met with some controversy, many will argue that videotape review is essential for self-directed learning and accurate psychotherapy supervision.
METHODS: The author describes a technique of small-group videotape training as provided in a psychiatry residency training program.
RESULTS: He reviews the merits and limitations of this format and suggests simple and inexpensive technical approaches to augment this training.
CONCLUSION: The author concludes that small-group videotape training is an efficient psychotherapy training format that encourages self-monitoring and the exchange of supportive peer feedback.

Surveys on influenza vaccination and illness in long-term-care facilities in Niigata Prefecture during an influenza A (H3N2) epidemic revealed that >20% of facilities had outbreaks and >10% of residents experienced influenza. Outbreaks and number of cases were significantly reduced by vaccination, which should be strongly recommended for institutionalized elderly people.
This randomized, controlled trial involving 316 patients in the home setting found no difference in the rate of phlebitis and/or occlusion among patients for whom a peripheral intravenous catheter was routinely resited at 72-96 hours and those for whom it was replaced only on clinical indication (76.8 events per 1,000 device-days vs 87.3 events per 1,000 device-days; P = .71). There were no bloodstream infections.
CRD SUMMARY: Preoperative use of statins showed no statistically significant reduction in the occurrence of atrial fibrillation following cardiac surgery, but more research is needed. Given the limitations of the included studies and the potential for some bias in the review, these findings should be interpreted with caution. The authors' recommendation for further research seems appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that there is a trend towards a reduced risk of falls associated with vitamin D treatment. Evidence relating to fracture risk was inconclusive. The conclusion about risk of falls is not well supported by the evidence presented, as no benefit was found for postmenopausal women and the review was not designed to apply to any other population group.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the results obtained for the clinical significance of cognitive-behavioural therapy were mixed and further research is required. The data appear to support the authors' conclusions, but it is difficult to assess the reliability of the conclusions given the limited search, poor reporting of review methods, and absence of a quality assessment.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated evidence for the use of cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) in acute mental health care settings. Only a small number of studies evaluating different forms of CBT were included. The conclusion that further research was needed seems appropriate but, due to limited reporting of the review methods, the possibility that relevant research was missed cannot be ruled out.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that stenting was an effective palliative treatment for malignant obstruction of the large bowel, with short hospital stays and low rates of stoma formation in comparison with open surgery. The conclusions were based on the statistical combination of data from randomised and non-randomised studies and the results differed between studies; the reliability of these conclusions is therefore unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors of the review concluded that there was insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about operative and non-operative management of thoracolumbar burst fractures without neurological deficit, and that further good-quality research is required. There were limitations to this review but, overall, the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors of this review concluded that cooled-tip and 8-mm-tip catheters are equally effective and safe for catheter ablation. Review limitations included incomplete reporting of review methods and the lack of an assessment of study quality. In addition, the review provided evidence of no statistically significant difference between cooled-tip and 8-mm-tip catheters rather than equivalence of the two interventions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed randomised evidence for the use of complementary and alternative therapies in the treatment of menopausal symptoms. The review included a wide range of interventions but concluded that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that any of the included therapies was effective. Given concerns about aspects of the review methods, it is not clear how reliable these conclusions are.
CRD SUMMARY: This review attempted to assess the role of computed tomography (CT) in the diagnostic workup of patients with small bowel obstruction. It concluded that CT is highly accurate for the diagnosis of ischaemia. Poor definition of inclusion criteria, a limited search strategy, poor reporting of review methodology or details of included studies, and the inappropriate use of aggregate measures of diagnostic accuracy severely limit the reliability of the findings.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of constraint-induced movement therapy (CIMT) to improve upper limb function and quality of life following stroke. The authors concluded that, compared with an alternative or no treatment, CIMT may improve upper limb function for some patients. The conclusion is suitably cautious given the very weak evidence identified.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine whether computed tomographic angiography improved health outcomes, or whether it was as beneficial as established alternatives such as conventional coronary angiography. The cautious conclusions appear appropriate given the paucity of evidence, but the restricted search and poor reporting of review methods make it difficult to assess the reliability of the results.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the accuracy of self-collected vaginal specimens with clinician-collected samples for the detection of human papillomavirus. The authors concluded that self-collected specimens using Dacron swabs, cotton swabs, or cytobrushes have a combined sensitivity of over 70%. The limited search, limited quality assessment and variability of the study results weaken the robustness of these conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficacy of folic acid supplementation in the prevention of stroke. Folic acid administration was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of stroke which had greater statistical significance when folic acid was given for primary stroke prevention. Whilst the conclusions are supported by the evidence presented, it is not possible to determine fully their reliability.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated intervention programmes for alcohol education or counselling for college or university students. The authors concluded that limited evidence suggests there are elements that improve outcomes but, in general, further research is required. Despite various potential sources of bias in the review process, the overall conclusion that further research is required is likely to be reliable.
AIM: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials reporting on the comparison of minimally invasive THA and standard incision technique.
METHOD: An online search in Medline, CINAHL,EMBASE, and the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register was performed. Data concerning the endpoints duration of procedure, blood loss,complications, and Harris Hip Score (HHS) were extracted and pooled using a random effects model.
RESULTS: 8 Studies observing a total of 917 patients(481 MIS, 436 Std.) were included. The weighted mean difference in duration of the procedures was 4 min, which is not significant(p = 0.21). There was significantly less blood loss in the mini group (p < 0.001). The difference in increases in HHS of averagely 4.14 pts. was only borderline significant (p = 0.06). The complication odds ratio showed no significance (p = 0.71).
CONCLUSION: There is only a marginal difference between these techniques. The minimally invasive total hip replacement is a variance of the standard procedure with better cosmesis. Differences in postoperative rehabilitation, however,are not within the scope of this study.

CRD SUMMARY: This review examined factors related to successful outcomes in the treatment of substance-abusing women. The author concluded that the limited evidence suggested elements that improve outcomes, but further research is required to confirm the findings. There were various potential sources of bias in the review process but, overall, the conclusions appear reasonable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effects of amiodarone in post-operative atrial fibrillation. It concluded that amiodarone prophylaxis is associated with a significant reduction in atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery, as well as a reduction in peri-operative ventricular tachyarrhythmias and strokes and a short but significant reduction in hospital stay. The authors' conclusions reflect the evidence presented and are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined the evidence for using videofluoroscopy to assess impaired swallowing in children. The overall conclusion was that the evidence is limited and further research is required. The limited search strategy, poor reporting of review methodology, and lack of a quality assessment mean that the completeness and reliability of the evidence base identified are uncertain.
Postoperative hemorrhage is a common complication in cardiac surgery, and it is associated with a considerable increase in morbidity, mortality, and cost. Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) is an emerging hemostatic agent, increasingly used in cardiac surgery. This article systematically reviews the evidence regarding the efficacy, safety, and cost of rFVIIa in this setting. Although definitive evidence from randomized controlled trials is lacking, the use of rFVIIa in patients experiencing refractory postoperative hemorrhage seems promising and relatively safe. However further research is required to definitively establish its clinical utility in the postoperative cardiac patient.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that patients with osteoporosis treated with teriparatide have a reduced risk of developing back pain up to 30 months after treatment. The manufacturer of teriparatide funded the review, sponsored the included studies and employed three of the authors. Important systematic review methods that help ensure the findings are reliable were not mentioned in the report.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of family psychosocial interventions for chronic illness. The author concluded that family psychosocial interventions generally appear promising, but more research is required. The poor reporting of review methods and study quality make it difficult to comment on the strength of the evidence underpinning the author's conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that celecoxib was the safest cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor when given in the lowest possible dose. The limited search, inadequate reporting of review methods, lack of a quality assessment of the included studies, and reliance upon data from observational studies to compare drugs mean that any conclusions might not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review attempted to assess the effectiveness of social stories for educating children with autism spectrum disorders. The authors concluded that current evidence supports the use of social story interventions for children with autism spectrum disorders. Poorly defined inclusion criteria, a limited search strategy and a small evidence base limit the reliability of these findings.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that rapid immunochromatographic tests can be used to rule in and out infection with dengue virus, but are more accurate when samples are collected later in the acute phase of infection. These findings are supported by the results presented, but should be interpreted with caution given the limitations in the searches and the presence of significant variability between studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the ability of ultrasound investigations to diagnose suspected deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and investigated reasons for differing results between studies. The authors concluded that duplex and triplex ultrasound are best at ruling out DVT in high-risk patients, whilst compression ultrasound is best at ruling in DVT in low-risk patients. The review was well conducted and reported and its conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that prophylactic antibiotics did not reduce wound infection after groin hernia mesh repair, and that further research is required for other types of abdominal wall hernia. This was a well-conducted and clearly reported review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that findings from studies with design limitations suggest that extra-anatomic bypass may not be the most appropriate 'gold' standard treatment for aortic graft infection. The authors' cautious conclusion appears appropriate in view of the limited evidence obtained from potentially biased, retrospective observational studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to determine the optimal strategy of adjuvant therapy in stage 1 ovarian cancer. There was some evidence that adjuvant chemotherapy improved 5-year overall and disease-free survival, but insufficient evidence to recommend radiotherapy. Surgical staging of suspected cases and further research is needed. The generalisability of the conclusions is uncertain given the insufficient reporting of review methods and study details.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the frequency of adverse maternal and foetal outcomes associated with external cephalic version in comparison with persisting breech presentation at term. The authors concluded that adverse outcomes are rare though, owing to poor reporting and methodological limitations, there was insufficient evidence to properly quantify adverse maternal and foetal outcomes. The authors' conclusions are appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effect of oral contraceptives on bone mineral density. The authors concluded that there is good evidence of a positive effect in perimenopausal women and fair evidence of a positive effect in hypothalamic oligo/amenorrhoeic premenopausal women. Poor reporting of review methods and reliance on a few small randomised controlled trials mean that these results should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of oral appliances (OAs) in obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea syndrome. The authors concluded that OAs are a feasible treatment, although continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) appeared more effective and adverse effects were reported with OAs. The review was reasonably well conducted, but there was insufficient evidence to directly compare CPAP with mandibular repositioning appliances and to support the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that self-management education for school-aged children with asthma resulted in a decrease in missed school days. Limitations in the conduct of the review and the unclear quality of the included studies mean that the results should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) TKIs (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) and single-agent chemotherapy had low response rates in treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer for patients with poor performance status. EGFR TKIs tended to more effective disease control and had lower toxicity. Quality and process limitations make the reliability of the conclusions unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors stated that no firm conclusion on the efficacy of tacrolimus to prevent graft rejection in organ transplantation could be made due to variation across studies. Despite weaknesses in the review process, given the variation between the studies the authors' cautious conclusions reflect the evidence presented and appear appropriate.
Skeletal muscle is one of the most unusual sites of metastasis from any malignancy. We report a patient with rapidly progressive contractures due to metastatic infiltration of a carcinoma of unknown origin into the skeletal muscle. This 61-year-old man presented with a 1-month history of rapidly evolving, painful restriction of mobility of his right arm and his legs. Computed tomography showed diffuse metastatic nodules in all muscles, particularly in the hip abductors. Muscle biopsy revealed extensive infiltration of the muscle with carcinoma cells.

In a retrospective case-control study comparing 100 colorectal cancer patients with 100 age-, race-, and sex-matched hospital controls and 51 spouse controls, no significant differences were observed in the historical frequency of bowel movements, presence of constipation, or use of laxatives between cases and controls. There is a suggestion of greater suppository or enema use in both control groups as compared to patients with colorectal cancer.

Using the Transtheoretical Model of behavior change as a theoretical framework, a Stage of Exercise Scale (SOES) was developed. The ability of the SOES to differentiate between subjects classified into each of the theoretically posited stages was then studied in a sample of 178 female adults. Results showed that the scale was able to significantly and meaningfully differentiate between subjects classified by stage in terms of exercise energy expenditure (p < 0.0001, omega 2 = 0.18), physical activity energy expenditure (p < 0.0001, omega 2 = 0.15), and VO2peak ml/kg/min (p < 0.0001, omega 2 = 0.19). Stage-specific interventions have been successful when applied to other health behaviors and would appear to have promise for increasing our understanding of the exercise initiation and maintenance process. As such, researchers and practitioners may wish to use the SOES to begin testing the efficacy of stage-specific physical activity interventions.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the report was to answer the following research question:
What is the clinical evidence for the risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections to health care workers caring for patients undergoing aerosol-generating clinical procedures, compared with the risk of transmission to health care workers caring for patients not undergoing aerosol-generating procedures?
There are several obstacles that slow down the diffusion of telepathology. One is related to uncertainty about the economic consequences of its adoption, possibly more so than in other fields of telemedicine. We have evaluated the economics of telepathology when used to provide a frozen-section service to a mountain hospital, in comparison with three current alternatives. In the specific situations studied, no one model was always less expensive than the others. In particular, owing to the very low cost of the ambulance service provided by the Red Cross, the ambulance model was least expensive when dealing with up to 73 frozen sections a year, while at higher case-loads telepathology was cheaper. If ambulance transfer is neglected, telepathology appears to be the most convenient approach to the remote frozen-section service. Although the consultant pathologist costs more than telemedicine, during free time he/she could perform other (routine) work, thus reducing the real cost of frozen sections.

Basic indicators of community support program treatment outcome as well as the degree to which the programs conform to practice guidelines for major depression are evaluated. Hospitalization rates subsequent to treatment are measured, and the correlation between hospitalization rates and practice patterns is determined. Data sets that describe outpatient and inpatient services over a 4-year period, but do not include common person identifiers were analyzed using probabilistic population estimates. Results indicate that there is substantial variation among the community programs in practice patterns and hospitalization rates, and the two are negatively correlated.

Inflammation is a crucial component of coronary atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction (MI). Chemokine receptors are important modulators of inflammation. Polymorphisms in genes coding for chemokine receptors, CCR2 and CCR5, have been studied as genetic markers of coronary artery disease. In the present study, we investigated whether genetic variants of CCR2-V64I and CCR5-delta32 chemokine receptors have any effect on the development of myocardial infarction. A total of 146 MI patients and 202 control subjects were genotyped for CCR2 and CCR5. CCR2-V64I genotypes were not significantly different between patients with MI and controls (P > 0.05). CCR5-delta32 genotype distribution in cases was significantly different from that of controls (P = 0.042). The CCR5-delta32 wt/deletion genotype frequencies for controls and cases were 0.10 and 0.19, respectively and individuals with CCR5-delta32 wt/deletion genotype had a 2.13-fold increased risk of myocardial infarction (P = 0.0013). Individuals carrying the CCR5-delta32 heterozygote or homozygous variant genotype (deletion/deletion + wt/deletion) had a 1.96-fold increased risk of myocardial infarction compared with the wild-type genotype (wt/wt) (p: 0.016). In conclusion, our data have suggested that genetic variant of CCR5 might be associated with the development of MI. Further larger sample size studies are required to confirm our findings.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the limitations of the available trials made it difficult to draw firm conclusions about the efficacy of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, in the treatment of hypertriglyceridaemia, in otherwise healthy people. The review had some limitations, but the authors' cautious conclusions reflect the evidence presented and seem appropriate.
To assess potential long-term risk factors for major pulmonary embolism, 46 subjects from the Framingham Heart Study with autopsy-confirmed and clinically significant pulmonary embolism were identified in whom age, systolic blood pressure, cholesterol level, cigarette use, glucose level, Metropolitan relative weight, and varicose veins were ascertained at entry into the Study. These variables were compared among these 46 subjects, all 3,470 subjects in whom these variables were measured at the inception of the Study, and the 998 of these subjects who died within 26 years of follow-up. In multivariate analysis of subjects with autopsy-confirmed major pulmonary embolism and all subjects who died, only Metropolitan relative weight was significantly and independently associated with pulmonary embolism and only among women (p less than 0.001). These findings indicate that, in this cohort, increased adiposity in women is an important long-term factor for significant pulmonary embolism at autopsy. This raises the possibility that weight reduction in obese women may decrease the chances of pulmonary embolism.
To study the quality and effect of blood produced by the cell saver compared with homologous blood in total hip arthroplasty, 40 patients were randomly divided into two groups. One group received autologous blood using the cell saver, whereas the second group served as a control, and received homologous bank blood. Hematologic and coagulation parameters of the patients were assessed both preoperatively and postoperatively. Samples from the autologous and the homologous blood were obtained before reinfusion, and were assessed as regards hematologic and biochemical parameters. The autologous blood satisfied all the intraoperative transfusion requirements of the autologous group and 75 percent of the total transfusion requirements. The operative and postoperative blood losses--hence, the total blood loss--were less in the autologous than in the control group. The autologous blood had a high hemoglobin, white blood cell, and plasma hemoglobin content and MCV compared with the homologous blood. Postoperatively, there were no differences as regards the hematologic parameters studied. There was no evidence of intravascular hemolysis in the autologous group. Postoperatively, in both groups, AT III, plasminogen, and protein C decreased. Other coagulation parameters were within normal limits in both groups. Intraoperative autotransfusion is safe and effective, and should be considered in hip arthroplasty to reduce the risks associated with homologous blood transfusion.
In order to promote better mental development in three-year-old children from poor Jamaican families, a home-visiting project was carried out with the aim of helping mothers to interact with and stimulate their children. Homes were visited once a week, and the use of toys and books was demonstrated to the mothers. The play equipment was then left with the family and exchanged at the following visit. After a maximum of 29 visits, the children had made significant gains (average 13 IQ points) compared with children in a previously matched control group. The mothers' knowledge of child-rearing had also improved. Similar intervention programmes may be useful on a larger scale, and need not be expensive if full use is made of the mothers' help.

The purpose of this pilot study was to refine and evaluate methods of measuring costs of an innovative home-health nursing intervention designed to support frail, older persons and their family caregivers. We evaluated a multifaceted strategy to collect a detailed utilization profile from 22 caregiver/care receiver dyads for hospital, ambulatory, home health, nursing home, and community services. The strategy was feasible for most participants, maximized accuracy of cost data, and minimized research burden on study participants. Lower overall costs were found in the intervention group, but the difference was not significant. Approaches to the measurement of costs in this study can serve as models for evaluating other innovations in nursing, home care, and long-term care.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDS) increased the risk of cardiac failure, but that the overall risk was low. The risks were similar for conventional NSAIDs and Cox-2 specific non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (COXIBs). There were some methodological problems with the review and these conclusions should be treated with some caution.
BACKGROUND: Controlled clinical trials produced contradictory results with respect to a specific analgesic effect of acupuncture. There is a lack of large multi-centre acupuncture trials. The German Acupuncture Trial represents the largest multi-centre study of acupuncture in the treatment of chronic pain caused by gonarthrosis up to now. METHODS: 900 patients will be randomised to three treatment arms. One group receives verum acupuncture, the second sham acupuncture, and the third conservative standard therapy. The trial protocol is described with eligibility criteria, detailed information on the treatment definition, blinding, endpoints, safety evaluation, statistical methods, sample size determination, monitoring, legal aspects, and the current status of the trial. DISCUSSION: A critical discussion is given regarding the considerations about standardisation of the acupuncture treatment, the choice of the control group, and the blinding of patients and observers.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that progressive resistance training improved muscle strength and function after total hip replacement, regardless of the timing of the intervention. Due to limitations in the review, including failure to systematically assess study quality and variation between the studies, these findings may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that combined 5-aminosalicylates (5-ASAs) appeared superior to oral 5-ASAs in inducing remission of mild to moderate ulcerative colitis. Topical 5-ASAs may be superior to oral 5-ASAs in preventing relapse of quiescent ulcerative colitis. Given the small number and low quality of available studies, the authors were appropriately tentative in their conclusions.
The California Verbal Learning Test - second edition (CVLT-II) is one of the most widely used neuropsychological tests in North America. The present study evaluated the 1-month test-retest reliability and practice effects associated with the standard and alternate forms of the CVLT-II in a sample of 195 healthy adults. Eighty participants underwent repeat assessment using the standard form of the CVLT-II on both occasions, whereas the remaining 115 individuals received the standard form at baseline and the alternate form at follow-up. Consistent with prior research, results revealed generally large test-retest correlation coefficients for the primary CVLT-II measures in both the standard/standard (range=0.80-0.84) and standard/alternate (range=0.61-0.73) cohorts. Despite exhibiting slightly lower test-retest reliability coefficients, participants in the alternate form group displayed notably smaller practice effects (Cohen's d range=-0.01 to 0.18) on the primary indices relative to individuals who received the standard form on both occasions (Cohen's d range=0.27-0.61). Reliable change indices were also generated and applied to primary CVLT-II variables to determine the base rates of significant improvements (range=2-10%), declines (range=0-7%), and stability (range=85-97%) in performance over time. Overall, findings from this study support the test-retest reliability of the standard and alternate forms of the CVLT-II in healthy adults and may enhance the usefulness of this test in longitudinal neuropsychological evaluations.

A family-focused psychosocial intervention for stroke survivors is described and illustrated with case studies. It is designed to improve functional recovery through four specific pathways: increased knowledge, efficacy, and control through stroke education; optimized social support; increased network cohesion; and improved problem-solving abilities. Rationales for these pathways are presented and methods of implementing them discussed.

The effect of high flux hemodialysis on left ventricular function in ESRD patients was evaluated in a double blind, single cross-over, study comparing conventional to high flux hemodialysis. The subjects were 21 stable chronic hemodialysis patients. Ten were randomly allocated to the conventional-high flux sequence and 11 to the reverse sequence. The conventional membrane was the CD 3,500 or 4,000; the high flux membrane was the Duoflux (Althin Medical Inc., Miami Lakes, Fla.). Both were cellulose acetate and both were sterilized with ethylene oxide. The dialysate bicarbonate and sodium were held constant for the study. The ultrafiltration rates were 3.5-5.0 ml/h/mm Hg transmembrane pressure for the conventional and 15 ml/h/mm for the high flux membrane. The beta-2-microglobulin sieving coefficient was 0 for conventional and 0.27 for the high-flux membrane. The modest improvements in estimates of systolic function suggest a cardiac advantage in high-flux dialysis, the clinical impact of which requires further study.

Neonatal tetanus (NT) is the most under-reported fatal infectious disease. Ministry of Health statistics in Egypt reflect only 10% of NT cases. This study aims at evaluating the effect of the campaign to immunize pregnant women against tetanus in Gharbia governorate in Egypt. In this report it is shown that NT admission decreased sharply in 1989, compared to the previous years, and that the severity of the disease was also less. The value of a sentinel site is also demonstrated. To eliminate NT, however, educational programmes and better perinatal care are needed in addition to vaccination.

A population-based study of 1810 persons, aged 75+, was investigated to evaluate the role of dementia and other chronic diseases as determinants of institutionalization in the elderly. The study population was examined at baseline and after a 3-year interval. After adjustment for sociodemographic characteristics, functional dependence, dementia, cerebrovascular disease and hip fracture were associated with living in an institution at baseline. Additionally, functional dependence, hip fracture and dementia were also associated with moving to an institution during the 3-year follow-up. In a similar analysis, including only nondemented subjects, the Mini-Mental State Examination emerged as one of the strongest determinants. The population attributable risk percentage of institutionalization during the 3-year follow-up due to dementia was 61%. This study confirms that dementia and cognitive impairment are the main contributors to institutionalization in the elderly, independently of their sociodemographic status, social network, or functional status.

The effectiveness of cabbage leaf extract was compared with that of a placebo in treating breast engorgement in lactating women. In a double-blind experiment with a pretest/posttest design, 21 participants received a cream containing cabbage leaf extract, while 18 received placebo cream. The placebo group received equal relief to the treated group, with the two groups showing no difference on all outcome measures. However, mothers perceived both creams to be effective in relieving discomfort. Feeding had a greater effect than the application of cream on relieving discomfort and decreasing tissue hardness. It is therefore recommended that lactation consultants encourage mothers to breastfeed if possible to relieve the discomfort of breast engorgement.

The live birth rates were analyzed after 688 microsurgical operations for infertility resulting from distal tubal lesions and after 885 in vitro fertilization cycles for tubal factor infertility at the Ljubljana University Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. The cumulative live birth rate five years after surgery was 31% (17% cases lost to follow-up). The cumulative live birth rate after four in vitro fertilization cycles for tubal infertility was 40% (8% per treated cycle). With two options for treatment, operable cases had a better prognosis than did the inoperable ones. If pregnancy did not occur two to three years after surgery, the patients underwent in vitro fertilization. The complementary use of microsurgery and in vitro fertilization has substantially improved the prognosis for infertility resulting from distal tubal lesions.

A double-blind controlled trial was conducted in which the efficacy of cimetidine in a dosage of 20 mg/kg/24 h in preventing upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage was tested in 34 critically ill patients on assisted ventilation. In 28 patients, 14 on cimetidine and 14 on placebo, gastric pH measurements and blood loss measured by 51Cr-labelled erythrocytes could be analyzed. Although cimetidine produced a markedly lower number of days with a gastric pH below 3.5 (17.4% vs. 72.2%) 5 patients on cimetidine bled as against 1 on placebo. These results do not suggest that cimetidine was effective in preventing stress-induced upper gastrointestinal bleeding.

Fifty-nine patients referred for painful diabetic neuropathy of the lower extremities were evaluated for depression and response to antidepressant drug therapy in a double-blind controlled study. All patients were found to have substantial degrees of depression during psychiatric interview and by Kupfer-Detre test scores (8.1 +/- 0.6, as compared with control values of 4.0 to 4.3 +/- 0.2). Treatment with imipramine hydrochloride or amitriptyline hydrochloride resulted in complete remission of lower extremity pains in all patients in 10 +/- 2 weeks, with concomitant relief of depression and return of depression test scores to 3.8. These results suggest that the syndrome of painful diabetic neuropathy of the lower extremities represents a depressive equivalent in a large proportion of cases and that treatment with imipramine or amitriptyline is a successful mode of therapy for such persons.

Prospective and longitudinal data were used to investigate scholastic and social resilience in 1,170 low-income black 12-year-olds. One-fifth were found to be scholastically resilient, almost two-fifths socially resilient, and one-quarter were both. Participation in extended childhood intervention was significantly associated with both resilience outcomes, while academic achievement in third-grade and parent expectations of educational attainment consistently predicted resilience and were major mediators of the effects of intervention and of risk status.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of a commercial spacer device versus an improvised spacer device in delivering aerosolized beta-2 agonist through metered dose inhaler in an acute exacerbation of bronchial asthma.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Urban tertiary care teaching hospital.
METHODS: 60 children between 1 to 12 years of age with acute asthma were prospectively enrolled and randomized into two groups. Detailed history, clinical evaluation and appropriate laboratory investigations were recorded on a pretested proforma. One group received inhaled salbutamol using metered dose inhaler via commercial spacer device (Group 1), while the other received it via improvised spacer device (Group II). The response was sequentially assessed after 20, 40 and 60 minutes of institution of therapy.
RESULTS: The two groups were comparable with respect to various parameters at presentation (p > 0.05). All the outcome parameters showed a significant improvement with time in both groups (p < 0.05). There was no statistical difference between the response in the two groups (p< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Metered dose inhaler with improvised spacer device is equivalent in efficacy and a more cost effective alternative to metered dose inhaler with commercial spacer for administration of beta-2 agonist in acute asthma.

A rapid test for the visual detection of anti-HCV antibodies in whole blood was evaluated in its accuracy when compared with EIA method. The rapid test was performed blind on 50 HCV EIA-positive (adsorbance greater than 3.0) and on 50 HCV EIA-negative samples. Each whole blood sample was 1:20, 1:50 and 1:100 diluted with saline solution for a total of 400 samples. Results showed a sensitivity of 100% when whole blood was tested, 96% when 1:20 diluted blood was tested, 30% when 1:50 diluted blood was tested and 4% when 1:100 diluted blood was tested. The specificity gave also better results and only one false-positive was found in all samples tested. The test took less than 3 min and only a mechanical pipette was required. In conclusion, the HCV Ab rapid test showed a very high accuracy and could be very useful for the detection of HCV-positive subjects in situations where rapid results are required or technical expertise is limited.

We compared the outcomes of 2,500 patients who suffered from previous cerebrovascular disorders (transient ischemic attacks, reversible ischemic neurologic deficits, or completed strokes) treated with acetylsalicylic acid plus dipyridamole or matched placebo and followed for 2 years. Treatment was associated with a 33.5% reduction (p less than 0.001) in the incidence of all end points (deaths from all causes or strokes) by intention-to-treat analysis and a 36.5% reduction (p less than 0.001) by explanatory analysis. End point reduction appeared to be similar in men and women. The effect of treatment was similar regardless of the patients' age, nature of the qualifying cerebrovascular event, site of the responsible lesion, and diastolic blood pressure. Our results demonstrate the efficacy of combined therapy, but the efficacy of acetylsalicylic acid or dipyridamole alone and the most effective acetylsalicylic acid dosage remain in question.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effect of parent-involved psychosocial interventions in the treatment of children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The authors concluded that family interventions have a low to moderate effect on ADHD and externalising symptoms, but a moderate effect on child-internalising symptoms. Limitations of the analysis and uncertain quality of the included studies restrict interpretation of the results.
The aim was to assess myocardial contractility in infants born <30 wk gestation developing low systemic blood flow (SBF) in the first day, and the effect of dobutamine versus dopamine. Superior vena cava (SVC) flow was used as a measure of SBF at 3, 10, and 24 h (n = 106). Infants with low SVC flow randomized to dopamine or dobutamine. Myocardial contractility was determined by the relationship between left ventricular (LV) mean velocity of circumferential fiber shortening (mVcfs) and wall stress. Infants who developed low SVC flow had significantly worse myocardial contractility at 3 h, but not 10 h. At 24 h, low-flow infants had lower than expected mVcfs for any given LV stress. In 37 infants randomized to inotrope, there was no significant difference in contractility at 10 microg/kg/min. At 20 microg/kg/min (n = 21), dopamine increased whereas dobutamine decreased LV stress. Infants on dobutamine had significantly lower than expected mVcfs for any given LV stress compared with infants on dopamine. Contractility was not improved by either inotrope at either dose. In conclusion, infants developing low SVC flow in the first day have worse myocardial contractility at 3 h. Neither inotrope increased contractility, but dopamine increased LV stress at 20 microg/kg/min.

OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to determine if dobutamine or dopamine results in greater improvements in systemic blood flow in very preterm infants with low flow during the first 24 hours of life.
STUDY DESIGN: A 2-center, randomized, double-blind study. Infants (n = 42) with low superior vena cava (SVC) flow (<41 mL/kg/min) in the first 12 hours were randomly assigned to receive 10 mL/kg normal saline solution, followed by 10 microg/kg/minute of dobutamine or dopamine. If low flow persisted or recurred, the inotrope was increased to 20 microg/kg/minute, with crossover to the other inotrope if treatment failed to maintain flow.
RESULTS: Volume produced a more significant increase in SVC flow than dopamine (+43%). At the highest dose, dobutamine resulted in a significantly greater increase in SVC flow than dopamine (mean, +9.9 vs -3.2 mL/kg/min, P =.02). Dopamine resulted in a significantly greater increase in blood pressure. Infants receiving dobutamine only at 24 hours had a greater right ventricular output than infants receiving dopamine (mean, 295 vs 167 mL/kg/min, P <.001). Forty percent failed to increase or maintain SVC flow in response to either inotrope. No significant differences in mortality or morbidity were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Dobutamine produced a greater increase in blood flow than dopamine.

Sixty-six patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection and diarrhoea caused by Cryptosporidium parvum were enrolled in a double-'blind' placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of nitazoxanide in the treatment of cryptosporidiosis related to the acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Patients were randomly assigned to one of 3 treatment groups and received either 500 mg twice daily of nitazoxanide, 1000 mg twice daily of nitazoxanide, or placebo orally for 14 d; the patients on nitazoxanide then crossed over to placebo while the placebo patients crossed over to nitazoxanide therapy at either the high or low dose depending on their randomization. Three post-treatment faecal examinations were conducted on days 15, 22 and 29 following initiation of treatment: patients were considered 'cured' if none revealed any C. parvum oocysts. Both doses of nitazoxanide produced parasitological cure rates superior to the placebo responses (12/19 [63%, P = 0.016] for patients receiving 1 g/d and 10/15 [67%, P = 0.013] for those receiving 2 g/d). Parasitological cure was correlated with the complete resolution of the diarrhoeal syndrome in 19 of the 22 treated patients who were considered parasitologically cured (86%). Both doses of nitazoxanide were well tolerated by the patients.

CRD SUMMARY: The review concludes that dilute vinegar solution should be considered over conventional antibiotic drops for the treatment of granular myringitis. The conclusion is based on just two small poorly designed studies and may not be reliable. 
OBJECTIVES: Third molar extraction produces inflammation, pain, and trismus, and different pharmacologic therapies have been evaluated for the minimization of postsurgical symptoms. The most frequently prescribed drugs are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, followed by steroids and opiates. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic search of the literature was carried out in PubMed, Scopus, MEDLINE, and Cochrane using steroid and third molar as key words. RESULTS: The most relevant randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses (n = 28) were selected from among 72 articles. CONCLUSIONS: Administration of corticosteroids improves the postoperative experience of patients and has a significant impact on trismus and inflammation. Greater effects appear to be achieved by using the parenteral route and by administering the corticosteroid before the surgery.

From a set of seventeen complete and tape-recorded psychoanalyses, a sample of findings is presented: (a) the level of agreement of two clinical judges on the psychological health of these patients is adequate for the late sessions, but not for the early sessions; (b) the amount of change during psychoanalysis appears to be similar to that in the Menninger Foundation Psychotherapy Research Project; (c) psychiatric severity measures from the early sessions can yield a significant level of prediction of the later benefits from psychoanalysis. Finally, further research uses of this collection of psychoanalyses are suggested.

Eleven patients with left bundle branch block and chest pain suggestive of coronary arterial disease were analyzed using thallium-201 exercise scintigraphy, M-mode echocardiography and coronary arteriography. The coronary arteries were shown to be normal in all patients. A reversible anteroseptal defect on thallium-201 scintigraphy and an asynchronous septal motion on echocardiography were evident in eight patients. Thus, symptomatic patients with left bundle branch block may have reversible anteroseptal defects on thallium-201 scintigraphy which do not indicate coronary artery disease. Rather, they may be due to functional ischemia secondary to abnormal septal motion.

Chlorthalidone 25 mg/triamterene 50 mg in once-daily oral doses was as effective in reducing blood pressure as chlorthalidone 25 mg alone. The decrease in serum potassium was statistically significantly less with the combination than for chlorthalidone. There were no notable differences between the treatments in any other measure of laboratory safety or adverse reactions.
Chlorthalidone 50 mg/triamterene 50 mg in once-daily oral doses was as effective in reducing blood pressure as chlorthalidone 50 mg alone. The decrease in serum potassium was statistically significantly less with the combination than for chlorthalidone. There were no notable differences between the treatments in any other measure of laboratory safety or adverse reaction.
We reviewed 19 elderly patients who underwent revision total hip arthroplasty with a proximal femoral replacement prosthesis for aseptic loosening and severe proximal femoral bone loss. The mean interval from initial hip replacement to revision arthroplasty was 8 (2-20) years. The mean age of the patients was 78 (63-87) years. 2 patients died within 2 years postoperatively and 1 patient was lost for follow-up evaluation. The remaining 16 patients were assessed clinically and radiographically after a mean follow-up period of 5 (2-11) years. All patients had local pain relief, but they all needed a crutch or another walking aid. According to the Merle d'Aubigne hip-rating scale there were no excellent results, 1 very good, 8 good, 5 fair, 2 poor and no bad results. 4 patients had an intraoperative fracture, 7 had a dislocation, 2 had a deep infection, and 3 patients had progressive loosening of the screws fixing the greater trochanter to the femoral component. Our series demonstrates that revision of a failed hip prosthesis, using a proximal femoral replacement prosthesis, presents complex problems.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the respective effectiveness and safety of 600 microg and 800 microg of intravaginal misoprostol for complete abortion in cases of early pregnancy failure (occurring in the first 12 weeks).
METHOD: A total of 114 women with a diagnosis of early pregnancy failure made by transvaginal ultrasonography at Rajavithi Hospital between November 25, 2002 and July 31, 2003, were assigned randomly to 2 groups of equal size. In one group the women received 600 microg of misoprostol and in the other 800 microg of misoprostol intravaginally.
RESULTS: The rate of complete abortion within 24 h was significantly higher in the group that received 800 microg of misoprostol (68.4%) than in the other group (45.6%) (P<0.05). There were no significant differences between the 2 groups regarding time interval between misoprostol insertion and complete abortion or side effects.
CONCLUSION: Intravaginal misoprostol 800 microg is significantly more effective than vaginal misoprostol 600 microg for the termination of an early pregnancy failure, with no significant differences in side effects.

30 patients with corneal epithelial defect due to removal of corneal foreign bodies were randomly allocated to receive either chloramphenicol with continuous application of an eyepad or chloramphenicol without the eyepad. Almost all corneal defects were healed at 24 h, and all were healed by 48 h, with no statistically significant difference between the two groups. Discomfort at 24 h was greater in the eyepad group than in the control group. An eyepad seems to confer no benefit in healing and is uncomfortable.

Seventy-three patients with fractures of the neck of the little finger metacarpal were randomized to treatment with a moulded metacarpal brace or neighbour strapping. Sixty-five of these attended for follow-up at 3 weeks. Both treatment modalities permitted a functional range of movement, but patients treated with the metacarpal brace had significantly less pain than those treated with neighbour strapping, and this facilitated an early return to work.

It has been estimated that one fourth to one half of all patients treated in physical therapy clinics suffer from low-back pain. The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of spinal flexion (Group I) and extension (Group II) exercises on low-back pain severity and thoracolumbar spinal mobility in chronic mechanical low-back pain patients. Both groups had significantly less low-back pain after treatment (P less than .10). There was no significant difference, however, between the spinal flexion and extension exercises in reduction of low-back pain severity. The results indicated a significant difference between the groups in increasing the sagittal mobility (P less than .10). The results did not indicate any significant difference between and within groups in increasing the coronal and transverse mobility of the thoracolumbar spine. Either the spinal flexion or extension exercises could be used to reduce chronic mechanical low-back pain severity, but the flexion exercises had an advantage in increasing the sagittal mobility within a short period of time.

Although violence against women is recognized as a major public health problem, few interventions have been developed to reduce abuse. In this study, 132 pregnant women received three counseling sessions that were designed to reduce further abuse. A comparison group of 67 abused women were offered wallet-sized cards listing community resources for abuse. Women in both groups were followed at 6 months and 12 months post-delivery. Using repeated measures MANCOVA with entry scores as a covariate, we found significantly less violence reported by women in the intervention group than by women in the comparison group.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown an increase in plasma levels of norepinephrine (NE) after clozapine treatment of schizophrenia. This effect has been suggested to relate to improvement in symptoms.
METHODS: To test whether other novel antipsychotic drugs have such an effect, the present experiment examined schizophrenic symptoms and plasma levels of NE before and after 5 weeks of treatment with risperidone or haloperidol.
RESULTS: Risperidone, but not haloperidol, significantly increased plasma NE; however, there was no correlation of this effect with clinical improvement on any symptom scale.
CONCLUSIONS: This finding suggests that risperidone shares similar properties with clozapine in enhancing peripheral NE, but that these changes in plasma NE may not be a consistent indicator of atypical antipsychotic drug efficacy.

TB-HIV collaborative activities are one of the cornerstones of TB control in the Stop TB strategy. Since 2003, most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have been gradually implementing TB-HIV collaborative activities; however, limited information is currently available on the degree of implementation. This study is therefore aimed at describing to what degree TB-HIV collaborative activities are being implemented in 17 countries selected for the study. These countries were asked to complete a semi-structured questionnaire. An analysis of this questionnaire revealed that the challenges for TB-HIV collaboration lie in the fields of human resources, surveillance and HIV testing of TB patients.

Alcohol and drug use in pregnancy is a significant concern. There is a paucity of treatment programs for substance-abusing pregnant women, especially if indigent. Furthermore, treatment retention is compromised when the drug of choice is crack-cocaine. This paper reports the results of a study comparing treatment retention of cocaine-abusing indigent pregnant women before and after incorporating pregnancy-specific interventions. Audits were performed on 603 charts of women enrolled between 1988 and 1994 in either a traditional treatment program (n = 114) or in the Pregnancy Substance Abuse Program (PSAP) (n = 489). Differences in treatment retention were found between the two treatment groups. Drop-out rates from the inpatient component of treatment were significantly lower in the PSAP group than in the control group (11.3% vs. 38.6%, p < .001). There was a higher rate of completion of outpatient treatment in the PSAP compared to the control group (34.4% vs. 13.5%, p < .005). These results were achieved with a 2-day decreased inpatient stay. Treatment retention improved when specialized interventions were provided, at minimal additional cost. These results have implications for other publicly funded treatment programs.

Low literacy and limited English proficiency have become a growing concern for health and safety educators. With one-fifth of the workforce reading below an eighth-grade level and possibly another tenth having limited English skills, health and safety educators and unions have increasingly become aware that current training programs often surpass the language and literacy abilities of workers being trained. This article describes the dilemmas facing health and safety professionals in incorporating knowledge about language and literacy skill levels. It documents creative strategies and new programs, largely based on participatory and popular education approaches, to provide training that simultaneously matches worker needs and leads to worker empowerment.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the clinical efficacy and safety of Yiweining (YWN) and gestrinone (GT) in treating post-operational patients of stage III endometriosis (EM-III).
METHODS: Fifty-two patients of EM-III after operation were randomly assigned into three groups, the YWN group (20 patients) was treated through oral intake of YWN 200 ml, twice a day; the GT group (19 patients) treated with gestrinone 2.5 mg, twice every week, with the medication starting from the 7th post-operational day and lasting for 6 months. The control group (13 patients) was untreated. Six months was one therapeutic course, and follow-up study was carried out in the 6 - 30 months after the end of the medication.
RESULTS: The recurrence rate in the YWN group and the GT group were 5.0% and 5.3% respectively, showing insignificant difference between the two groups, but they were lower than that in the control group (30.7%, P < 0.05). Besides, the adverse reaction rate in the YWN group was lower than that in the GT group (10.0% vs 31.6%, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Application of YWN to prevent the post-operational recurrence of endometriosis is effective and safe, and its efficacy is similar to that of GT.

A randomized controlled trial of tamoxifen (60 mg/die) versus placebo was performed in patients with cirrhosis and advanced inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. Twenty-two patients were matched and coupled for sex, age, Child-Pugh class and tumour mass and then randomized to tamoxifen or placebo. Median survival was 74 weeks in the tamoxifen group (range 27 to 144 weeks) and 52 weeks in the placebo group (range 4 to 112 weeks). The survival of patients treated with tamoxifen improved significantly compared to the controls (Logrank-test, p = 0.04). These findings suggest that the effect of the antiestrogen tamoxifen is both statistically and clinically significant in increasing survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.
Following reports that specific estrogen receptors could be detected in samples of hepatocellular carcinoma tissue, a prospective randomized controlled trial was undertaken in 59 patients, half of whom received doxorubicin (60 mg/m2 at 3-week intervals) and half doxorubicin and tamoxifen (10 mg twice per day). Response occurred in three (11%) of those patients receiving doxorubicin alone and in four (16%) of those given both drugs. This difference was not statistically significant nor was the difference in survival when compared by life-table analysis. One patient treated with both drugs achieved complete remission for 30 months which was maintained (on tamoxifen alone) for 18 months before death from a non-tumor-related condition. Tamoxifen may have a role in maintenance of doxorubicin-induced remissions.

Twenty-three patients with a major depressive disorder were deprived of a night's sleep twice weekly, one week staying up in the dimly lit living room of the ward (less than 60 lux), and one week in a brightly lit room (greater than 2000 lux). Immediate, but transient beneficial effects of sleep deprivation were observed primarily in eight patients (the 'responders'). The immediate effects did not differ greatly for the two conditions, indicating that exposure to light at night is an implausible explanation for the antidepressant effects of total sleep deprivation. There was some evidence that the bright light condition led to a more prolonged improvement of the responders.

This report incorporates the results of an investigation designed to test the effectiveness of potassium iodide and potassium iodate in the control of Himalayan endemic goitre when these compounds are added in small physiological doses to the domestic salt habitually consumed by the people in the endemic belt. In a prospective study lasting five years, a striking reduction in the prevalence of goitre was observed in areas receiving salt fortified with either potassium iodide or potassium iodate. During the same period, goitre prevalence remained unchanged in the control zone, which received plain, unfortified salt. The study has an important bearing on the problem of goitre control in developing countries that use moist, coarsely crystalline salt.

Two IUDs (Copper T 220 C and Alza T IPCS 52) were comparatively studied by randomized insertions in 200 Thai women who attended the Family Planning Clinic at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University. Point estimates of the pregnancy rate and rate of removal for bleeding and pain at 18 months were lower for the copper device than for the Alza T IPCS 52, but neither these nor any other pertinent event rates reached statistical significance. Study of the Alza device was halted before the completion of 2 years because reports from other centres indicated an unacceptable pregnancy rate beyond 2 years.

We carried out a prospective analysis of 86 patients with brucellosis, and 26 (30%) cases were diagnosed as brucellar spondylitis. Two patients had cervical involvement, two thoracic, and 21 lumbosacral as seen in MRI. Four patients had epidural abscess and two had paravertebral abscess. All patients received combined antibiotic therapy for 4 to 12 months. Those with cervical involvement underwent surgical treatment because of medullar compression. Neither death nor severe sequelae were observed.

Four of six patients with endometrial cancer had initial response to progesterone therapy and obtained complete response; three among them had successful pregnancies with three live births. The results suggest that progesterone therapy, combined with assisted reproductive technology, provides more chance of carrying a full-term pregnancy for patients with endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Compelling evidence exists that conflict and communication problems occur between nursing home staff and family members of residents. However, few interventions have been documented that simultaneously address the needs of both groups. The Partners in Caregiving program was created to train staff and family members in communication techniques and conflict resolution skills. Through a joint meeting with facility administrators, both groups also have the opportunity to influence facility practices. Evaluation data indicated that satisfaction with the program was extremely high, and that positive changes in staff-family interactions occurred.

We compared several procedures designed to modify consumer food purchases with the objectives of reducing fat and increasing carbohydrate content, and reducing dollar expenditures on food. Participants were 126 volunteer community households which, after a 7-week baseline period, were randomly assigned to video-modeling, video-modeling-feedback, video-lecture, video-lecture-feedback, participant-modeling, video-modeling-discussion, and control conditions. The main dependent measure was a weekly record of food purchases, convertible to percentages of nutrients and dollar expenditures. Results indicated that modeling-feedback and participant-modeling procedures were most effective (e.g., 6% reduction of total fat consumption, 19% dollar savings). Strategies to refine and automate modeling and feedback in supermarkets that may benefit consumers, corporations, and government are discussed.

OBJECTIVE: Several studies have reported a reduction of relapses after the long-term administration of IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) to patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), but they were mostly small and differed in terms of predefined outcome variables and treatment regimen. We therefore set out to test two different doses of a new formulation of immunoglobulin termed IGIV-C 10% for suppression of both clinical and MRI disease activity as well as safety.
METHODS: One hundred twenty-seven patients with RRMS participated in this multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Forty-four and 42 patients received treatment with 0.2 and 0.4 g/kg of IGIV-C 10%, and 41 patients received an equal volume of placebo (0.1% albumin) every 4 weeks for 48 weeks. The primary endpoint was the proportion of relapse-free patients. The main secondary endpoint was lesion activity assessed by 6-weekly MRI.
RESULTS: Baseline variables were similar in IVIG- and placebo-treated groups. After 1 year, the proportion of relapse-free patients did not differ statistically according to treatment (IVIG 0.2 g/kg: 57%; IVIG 0.4 g/kg: 60%; placebo: 68%), and there was no difference regarding the cumulative number of unique newly active MRI lesions (median numbers: IVIG 0.2 g/kg: 8.0; IVIG 0.4 g/kg: 5.0; placebo: 7.2) after 48 weeks. There were no significant between-group differences in the rates of adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Although IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment was well tolerated, this study did not substantiate a beneficial effect of IVIG in doses ranging from 0.2 to 0.4 g/kg. This result seriously questions the utility of IVIG for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.

Fifteen children with exercise-induced asthma (EIA) participated in a double-blind trial comparing the protective effects of inhaled sodium cromoglycate (20 mg/2 ml), ipratropium bromide (500 micrograms/2 ml) and verapamil (5 mg/2 ml). Saline was used as control. There was no significant difference in base line pulmonary function before and after the administration of each agent. After exercise the maximal percentage fall in the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV-1) (means and SD) were 40.9 +/- 17.2 after inhalation of saline, 15.3 +/- 11.7 after sodium cromoglycate, 36.2 +/- 21.4 after verapamil and 21.7 +/- 17.7 after ipratropium bromide. The inhibitory effects of sodium cromoglycate and ipratropium bromide were significant whereas verapamil failed to produce any effect. To see if a double dose of verapamil is more effective, nine different children with EIA were provoked by the same standardized treadmill running after giving a placebo (4 ml saline) and after verapamil (10 mg in 4 ml). Despite the double dose, again verapamil was ineffective even though the protection index doubled that obtained with the lower dose. The results suggest that the calcium antagonist (verapamil) had almost no effect on the prevention of EIA in the children studied.

The primary aim of this feasibility study was to determine if caregivers (n = 5) were willing and able to use Caring-Web, a Web-based intervention for support, from their home Internet connection for 3 months. The caregivers' perceived health and satisfaction with caring, as well as the care recipients' use of healthcare services, were recorded. The experience of caring (problems and successes) was examined. Data were collected via weekly online surveys and e-mail discussions. Descriptive analyses revealed that the 3 caregivers who completed the study were satisfied with Caring-Web. Caregivers rated their health as average to excellent and their satisfaction with caring as good. Care recipients averaged 6 calls/visits to a medical office with one emergency room visit and subsequent hospitalization. Major problems for the caregivers included dealing with medical conditions about which they lacked knowledge. Content analysis of the e-mail discussions revealed that subjects sought information about medical conditions related to caring for the survivor of the stroke. Major successes for the caregivers involved communicating effectively with the care recipient and returning to everyday life with family and friends.
Occupational stress in hospital cleaners (n = 50), and the effect of relaxation training (n = 25, age matched, randomized), were studied by recording the electrical activity of the upper trapezius muscle at rest and during working conditions at the beginning, middle, and end of a 6-month follow-up period. A short (15-minute) relaxation program was practiced daily at the workplace to provide stress management. The amount of sick leave was counted, and the extent of depression and some psychosocial working factors were screened. Intercorrelations were found between the neck-shoulder tension, psychosocial factors, depression, and the absentee rate. The relaxation training diminished tension in the neck-shoulder region efficiently; nevertheless, the decrease in absenteeism might have been related mainly to the social support offered by the research maneuver itself.

Preoperative chemoradiotherapy is used in locally advanced rectal cancer to reduce local recurrence and improve operability, however a proportion of tumors do not undergo significant regression. Identification of predictive markers of response to chemoradiotherapy would improve patient selection and may allow response modification by targeting of specific pathways. The aim of this study was to determine whether expression of glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) and p53 in pretreatment rectal cancer biopsies was predictive of tumor response to chemoradiotherapy. Immunohistochemical staining for GLUT-1 and p53 was performed on 69 pretreatment biopsies and compared to tumor response in the resected specimen as determined by the tumor regression grade (TRG) scoring system. GLUT-1 expression was significantly associated with reduced response to chemoradiotherapy and increasing GLUT expression correlated with poorer response (p=0.02). GLUT-1 negative tumors had a 70% probability of good response (TRG3/4) compared to a 31% probability of good response in GLUT-1 positive tumors. GLUT-1 may be a useful predictive marker of response to chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer.

This study sought to determine the effect of an advanced-practice-nurse (APN)-led telephone intervention on hospital readmissions, quality of life, and self-care behaviors (SCBs) of patients with heart failure (HF). Twenty participants were randomly assigned to either an experimental group that received the APN-led telephone intervention (ALTI) or a control group that received usual care in this pretest-posttest experimental study. The results of this study support the idea that an ALTI positively impacts outcomes of patient with HF, particularly by improving SCBs and decreasing hospital readmissions. An ALTI warrants consideration to improve outcomes of patients with HF.

Stability after bimaxillary surgery to correct open bite malocclusion and mandibular retrognathism was evaluated on lateral cephalograms before surgery, 8 weeks post-operatively, and after 2 years. The 58 consecutive patients were treated to a normal occlusion and good facial aesthetics. Treatment included the orthodontic alignment of teeth by maxillary and mandibular fixed appliances, Le Fort I osteotomy, and bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy. Twenty-six patients also had a genioplasty. Intra-osseous wires or bicortical screws were used for fixation. Twenty-three patients had maxillo-mandibular fixation (MMF) for 8 weeks or more, six for 4-7 weeks, 14 for 1-3 weeks, and 15 had no fixation. At follow-up 2 years later, the maxilla remained unchanged and the mandible had rotated on average 1.4 degrees posteriorly. Seventeen patients had an open bite. Among them, eight patients had undergone segmental osteotomies. The relapse was mainly due to incisor proclination. The most stabile overbite was found in the group with no MMF after surgery.

The purpose of this pilot study was to investigate nurses' views of the effects of clinical supervision in terms of its influence over their working situation, as well as their satisfaction with their working milieu. The nurses who took part in an education programme and a clinical supervision programme worked on two wards in a medical clinic. Nurses answered a questionnaire measuring the psychosocial environment. Data were analysed by means of descriptive statistics. Results showed that the nurses felt more confirmed in their work and more satisfied with the information given after 9 months of clinical supervision. Results point to the need for further investigations concerning clinical supervision as a method of achieving job satisfaction among nurses.

OBJECTIVE: To determine feasibility of community-based distribution of misoprostol for preventing postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) to pregnant woman through community volunteers working under government health services.
METHODS: Implemented in one district in Nepal. The primary measure of performance was uterotonic protection after childbirth, measured using pre- and postintervention surveys (28 clusters, each with 30 households). Maternal deaths were ascertained through systematic health facility and community-based surveillance; causes of death were assigned based on verbal autopsy.
RESULTS: Of 840 postintervention survey respondents, 73.2% received misoprostol. The standardized proportion of vaginal deliveries protected by a uterotonic rose from 11.6% to 74.2%. Those experiencing the largest gains were the poor, the illiterate, and those living in remote areas.
CONCLUSION: Community-based distribution of misoprostol for PPH prevention can be successfully implemented under government health services in a low-resource, geographically challenging setting, resulting in much increased population-level protection against PPH, with particularly large gains among the disadvantaged.

PURPOSE: The safety of using ketamine-propofol combinations as an alternative to using either agent alone for procedural sedation is discussed.
SUMMARY: A total of 10 trials comparing the combination of ketamine and propofol with either agent alone for procedural sedation in the emergency department were examined. The evidence reviewed suggests that combining these agents may help to minimize adverse effects such as hypotension and respiratory depression. Ketamine is not commonly used as a single agent in adults because of the risk for emergence reactions; however, when combined with propofol, no significant increase in this adverse effect was found compared with propofol monotherapy. Administering ketamine and propofol can be accomplished by using a two-syringe technique or combining both medications into a single syringe. When two syringes are used, a ketamine 0.3-0.5-mg/kg i.v. bolus dose is administered, followed by a propofol 0.4-1-mg/kg i.v. bolus dose. Sedation is maintained with intermittent i.v. boluses of propofol 0.1-0.5 mg/kg. A 1:1 ratio of ketamine and propofol can also be combined into a single syringe by using the same concentration (10 mg/mL) and equal volumes of each drug, yielding a final concentration of 5 mg/mL for each component.
CONCLUSION: The combined use of ketamine and propofol is a reasonable alternative to propofol alone for procedural sedation in patients at higher risk for respiratory depression or hypotension. Use of the combination requires the development of standardized protocols for drug preparation and dosage to minimize the potential for errors.

In a randomized crossover study, 181 patients over the age of 65 with recurrent breast cancer received either tamoxifen or cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF). After progression on tamoxifen, a hormone withdrawal period was required. Because of altered pharmacokinetics with aging, creatinine clearance was used in calculating the dose of CMF. Response rates were 45% on tamoxifen and 38% on CMF, with median durations of 10.4 and 7.9 months, respectively. Survival rates tended to favor tamoxifen as the initial treatment even in estrogen-receptor-negative patients. Additional disease control with hormone withdrawal occurred in 23% of patients, and this benefit was highly correlated with prior hormone response. We conclude that initiation of hormone therapy rather than CMF chemotherapy is justified in almost all situations in elderly patients, and combination chemotherapy, is safe and useful after hormone failure if modified on the basis of renal dysfunction.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To determine the benefit of the addition of ipratropium bromide to beta-agonist therapy of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
DESIGN: The trial was randomized and double blinded.
SETTING: The study was conducted in the emergency department of Parkland Memorial Hospital, a busy, inner-city, county hospital.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were treated in the medicine emergency department with either the standard regimen of nebulized isoetharine, 0.5 mL of a 1% solution (5.0 mg) diluted to 2.0 mL with normal saline every hour (control group) or with the same regimen plus ipratropium bromide, 54 micrograms (three puffs) after the first isoetharine treatment and 36 micrograms (two puffs) after the second and fourth (experimental group). A placebo metered-dose inhaler used in the same manner as the ipratropium blinded the study to both the patients and medical personnel.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The group treated with the addition of ipratropium (30) was discharged from the ED an average of 91 minutes (P less than .05) sooner than the control group (25) and required on the average one less isoetharine treatment (P less than .05). The pulmonary functions tested, forced expiratory volume in the first second, and the forced vital capacity were the same in the two groups initially and on discharge, as identical discharge criteria were used in each group.
CONCLUSION: The addition of ipratropium to standard beta-agonist treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations shortens the duration of treatment required in the ED.

Ten male patients with peripheral vascular disease, Type 2 (LaFontaine), were randomly assigned in a double-blind study to receive either Na2 ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) plus MgSO4, B complex, and vitamin C, or a placebo of MgSO4, B complex, and vitamin C in Ringer's lactate solution. A total of 20 intravenous infusions were planned for administration to each patient. Clinical and laboratory (noninvasive) tests showed dramatic improvements after 10 infusions in some patients, and thus was broken the code indicating who was receiving EDTA and who was receiving placebo. The group that improved had been receiving EDTA; there was no change in the placebo group. The trial was then completed in a single-blind fashion. Patients originally assigned to receive placebo then received 10 EDTA infusions, while the group originally assigned to EDTA received 20 EDTA infusions. The group that had formerly received placebo showed improvements comparable to those seen in the first EDTA group after 10 treatments.

BACKGROUND: The use of repeated intravenous infusions of EDTA, which has become known as "chelation therapy," has been promoted for treating intermittent claudication as well as a wide range of other disorders. Multiple reports of excellent results in large numbers of patients have encouraged the use of this regimen. The lack of well-controlled studies substantiating the benefits of this treatment has limited its use mainly to private clinics. The aim of the study was to assess the benefits of chelation therapy in patients with intermittent claudication.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial included 32 patients with intermittent claudication who were randomized to a treatment group (15) and a control group (17). Main outcome measures were subjective and measured walking distances and ankle/brachial pulse indices. Other outcome measures included lifestyle and subjective parameters of improvement, cardiac function, ECG, renal function, hematology, blood glucose, and lipid biochemistry. No clinically significant differences in main outcome measures between chelation therapy and placebo groups were detected up to 3 months after treatment. Measures of mood state, activities of daily living, and quality of life factors were not consistently affected by chelation therapy. An equal proportion (13%) of each group thought that they had received the active agent. The proportion of patients showing an improvement in walking distance was not significantly different between the chelation group (60%) and the control group (59%).
CONCLUSIONS: Chelation therapy has no significant beneficial effects over placebo in patients with intermittent claudication.

To determine if dopamine would prevent the renal side effects of indomethacin, fifteen preterm infants were randomized into two groups: seven received indomethacin alone, and eight received indomethacin together with low dose dopamine infusion. Infants who received indomethacin together with dopamine had significantly higher UV (p less than 0.005), CNa (p less than 0.005), Cosm (p less than 0.005) and FENA (p less than 0.005) than those of infants who received indomethacin alone. There was, however, no significant difference in Ccr and FNa between the groups. These data indicate that dopamine overcomes indomethacins renal side effects of tubular origin, but it cannot prevent the renal vasoconstrictive action of vasoconstrictor hormones following the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by indomethacin. Considering that RBF and GFR turn to normal approximately 12 hours after the last dose of indomethacin, and that with the use of dopamine systemic blood pressure and peripheral circulation can also be normalized and to some extent myocardiac contractility improved, low doses of dopamine can be used instead of furosemide in the sick preterm infant with PDA when indomethacin therapy is indicated.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that nicorandil treatment as an adjunct to coronary reperfusion therapy improved microvascular function, increased left ventricular ejection fraction and reduced left ventricular end-diastolic volume index. In view of the limited search, lack of information on study quality, heterogeneity between studies and possible publication bias, these conclusions should be interpreted with some caution.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of stanol esters in lowering cholesterol in a US population.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: After a run-in phase, 318 subjects were randomized to receive one of the following margarine-like spreads containing stanol ester or placebo for 8 weeks: EU 3 G: 1 g of stanol (ester form) per 8-g serving of a European formula 3 times a day; US 3 G: 1 g of stanol (ester form) per 8-g serving of a US reformulation 3 times a day; US 2 G: 0.67 g of stanol (ester form) per 8-g serving of a US reformulation 3 times a day; or placebo spread.
RESULTS: Mean +/- SD baseline total cholesterol (TC) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels were 233+/-20 and 153+21 mg+/-dL, respectively. In the US 3 G group, 3 g daily of stanol esters lowered TC and LDL-C levels by 6.4% and 10.1%, respectively. There was a dose-dependent response compared with 2 g daily (US 2 G). Triglyceride and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were unchanged. The incidence of adverse effects was not different from placebo. Serum vitamin A and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels were not affected.
CONCLUSIONS: Stanol esters lowered TC and LDL-C levels in a mildly hypercholesterolemic US population without evidence of adverse effects. It may be a useful dietary adjunct to lower cholesterol.

This paper systematically reviews research on the effects of gluten-free and/or casein-free (GFCF) diets in the treatment of ASD. Database, hand, and ancestry searches identified 15 articles for review. Each study was analyzed and summarized in terms of (a) participants, (b) specifics of the intervention, (c) dependent variables, (d) results, and (e) certainty of evidence. Critical analysis of each study's methodological rigor and results reveal that the current corpus of research does not support the use of GFCF diets in the treatment of ASD. Given the lack of empirical support, and the adverse consequences often associated with GFCF diets (e.g., stigmatization, diversion of treatment resources, reduced bone cortical thickness), such diets should only be implemented in the event a child with ASD experiences acute behavioral changes, seemingly associated with changes in diet, and/or medical professionals confirm through testing the child has allergies or food intolerances to gluten and/or casein.
Eighteen caries-active adolescents, each having both a class II conventional amalgam (Dispersalloy) and a glass-ionomer (Ketac Silver) tunnel restoration of the same age placed on a contralateral tooth, were part of a 3-year clinical study. At the 1- and 2-year examinations all test restorations were assessed as acceptable in all patients. At the 3-year assessment three amalgam restorations failed due to recurrent caries, and one glass-ionomer restoration failed due to marginal ridge fracture. During the entire study period, the requirement of restorative therapy because of primary proximal caries was significantly reduced (p < 0.05) on tooth surfaces adjacent to the glass-ionomer restorations as compared with that on tooth surfaces adjacent to the amalgam restorations.

Thirty-four patients, each receiving internal mammary artery (IMAG) as well as saphenous vein grafts (SVGs), returned with symptoms 3 to 12 years after operation and underwent angiographic studies. At a mean follow-up period of 6.8 years, two (6%) IMAGs were occluded and 33 (94%) were in excellent condition. Of the 57 SVGs, 28 (48%) were totally occluded, 12 (22%) had severe atherosclerosis, and only 17 (30%) were in good condition. Seven patients (20%) had new significant lesions in the ungrafted coronary arteries. Failure of SVGs was the predominant cause of symptoms in this group of patients. Late failure of the SVGs appears to be due to progressive atherosclerosis in the grafts. The IMAGs tend to remain free from atherosclerosis and perform much better than the SVGs in the long run.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness of metoprolol in preventing clinically detectable atrial fibrillation (AF) and flutter after coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
METHODS: An open, randomized study was carried out to treat 200 patients who had undergone isolated CABG surgery with extracorporeal circulation. The patients were randomized to either receive metoprolol orally or not to receive the medication in the postoperative period. The outcomes were the detection of sustained atrial AF and flutter, which were symptomatic or required treatment. The patients with the following characteristics were excluded from the study: baseline left ventricular ejection fraction < 35%; previous AF; history of bronchospasm; second- and third-degree atrioventricular blocks, low cardiac output, and heart failure.
RESULTS: Arrhythmias occurred in 11 out of 100 patients in the metoprolol group and in 24 out of 100 patients in the control group (P=0.02). The relative risk (RR) was 0.46 (95% CI = 0.24-0.88), and the number necessary to treat (NNT) and avoid the outcome was 8 patients. AF was the arrhythmia most frequently observed (30/35). In 38 patients aged 70 years or more, the arrhythmias occurred in 2 out of 19 patients in the metoprolol group and in 10 out of 19 patients in the control group (c2 Yates: P=0.01). The relative risk was 0.20 (95% CI = 0.05-0.79) and the number necessary to treat was 2 patients.
CONCLUSION: Metoprolol is effective in preventing AF and flutter in the postoperative period of CABG surgery, and this effect was more evident in the group of elderly patients.

Evaluated the psychotherapeutic adjunct of bibliotherapy in a maximum security correctional setting with 54 volunteers from a general and segregation population. Results indicated no differences between the treatment methods, but significant increases in self-concept and internal locus of control with an interaction on the dependent measure of Chance locus of control. There were no significant effects on the dependent variables as a result of the level of participation of the volunteers. It was concluded that bibliotherapy may have a facilitative effect on self-concept and internal locus of control, but cannot be differentiated from the effects of therapist intervention.

This article describes the conceptual basis, design, and intervention approach for a worksite-based heart disease risk reduction project. Baseline characteristics of the 26 moderate size worksites participating in the Take Heart Project are also described. The trial is designed to produce changes at both the organization and employee level on tobacco use, dietary fat intake, and serum cholesterol. A key feature of the intervention is creation of employee steering committees to enhance ownership and involvement. From a menu of brief, low-intensity health education and environmental change activities, these committees select activities best suited to their worksite. The baseline characteristics of organizations randomized to intervention and control conditions were similar, and indicated a relatively high level of worksite activity related to cholesterol and smoking.

This retrospective study to determine the incidence of bacterial septicaemia in neonates at the Mount Hope Women's Hospital, Trinidad during a 2-year period, 1996 to 1997, included all neonates whose blood or cerebrospinal fluid cultured positive for bacteria. There were 9866 live births (LB), 102 of whom were diagnosed with bacterial sepsis, an incidence of 10/1000 LB. Thirty-one neonates had a positive culture for group B Streptococcus, an incidence of 3/1000 LB. Gram-negative organisms accounted for 63% of positive cultures. There were three outbreaks of nosocomial infection, two caused by Enterobacter spp with mortality rates of 37% and 50% and one outbreak caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa with a mortality rate of 25%. The overall mortality rate was 27% (27/102), 63% were boys and 58% were preterm. The incidence of neonatal bacterial sepsis of 10/1000 LB is the highest recorded for the Caribbean and indicates that infection might be an important cause of the high perinatal mortality rate.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found that the Maudsley model of family therapy was a promising treatment for adolescents with anorexia nervosa, but evidence for other forms of family therapy was limited and methodologically weak. The reporting and methodology used in this review make it difficult to assess the reliability of these conclusions.
Eating disorders represent a significant source of psychological impairment among adolescents. However, most controlled treatment studies have focused on adult populations. This review provides a synthesis of existing data concerning the efficacy of various psychosocial interventions for eating disorders in adolescent samples. Modes of therapy examined in adolescent samples include family therapy, cognitive therapy, behavioral therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy mostly in patients with anorexia nervosa. At this time, the evidence base is strongest for the Maudsley model of family therapy for anorexia nervosa. Evidence of efficacy for other treatments and other conditions is limited by several methodological factors including the small number of studies, failure to use appropriate control conditions or randomization procedures, and small sample sizes (i.e., fewer than 10 participants per treatment arm). Potential moderators and mediators of treatment effect are reviewed. Finally, results from adolescent studies are contrasted with those from adult studies of eating disorders treatment. Many studies of adult populations comprise late adolescent/young adult participants, suggesting that findings regarding the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for bulimia nervosa in adults likely extend to older adolescent populations.

This study estimates the safety effect of road lighting on accidents in darkness on Dutch roads, using data from an interactive database containing 763,000 injury accidents and 3.3 million property damage accidents covering the period 1987-2006. Two estimators of effect are used, and the results are combined by applying techniques of meta-analysis. Injury accidents are reduced by 50%. This effect is larger than the effects found in most of the earlier studies. The effect on fatal accidents is slightly larger than the effect on injury accidents. The effect during twilight is about 2/3 of the effect in darkness. The effect of road lighting is significantly smaller during adverse weather and road surface conditions than during fine conditions. The effects on pedestrian, bicycle and moped accidents are significantly larger than the effects on automobile and motorcycle accidents. The risk of injury accidents was found to increase in darkness. The average increase in risk was estimated to 17% on lit rural roads and 145% on unlit rural roads. The average increase in risk during rainy conditions is about 50% on lit rural roads and about 190% on unlit rural roads. The average increase in risk with respect to pedestrian accidents is about 140% on lit rural roads and about 360% on unlit rural roads.

BACKGROUND: The chemotherapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer is in a Bottleneck. The target therapy of Anti-angiogenesis gradually shows an advantage in the therapy of patients with advanced NSCLC. To investigate the short-term efficacy, safety and the quality of life of the target therapy of rh-Endostin combined with chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: Sixty-two advanced NSCLC patients were randomly divided into either the trial group with chemotherapy plus rh-Endostin or control group with chemotherapy alone. The efficacy and toxicity were evaluated after 2 cycles according to RECIST criteria.
RESULTS: The trial groups efficiency rate was 46.87%, while the control group was 26.66%, there was no significant differences of two groups (Chi-square=1.912, P=0.166). The clinical benefit rate was 81.25% in the trial group and 53.33% in control group. There was significant difference of the clinical benefit rate between the trial group and the control group (Chi-square=4.3185, P=0.0377). The score of quality of life in the trial group was significantly higher than that the control group after the treatment (Chi-square=11.233, P=0.0008). There was no significant difference of incidence of toxicities between the trial group and the control group (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Rh-Endostin combined with chemotherapy was effective, reasonable, safe and well tolerated for advanced NSCLC.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the clinical effectiveness of drug-eluting coronary artery stents in percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with coronary artery disease and concluded that they should be targeted at the subgroups of patients with the highest risks of requiring reintervention. A number of areas were highlighted for further research. The conclusions are likely to be reliable.
Sessile polyps in the antrum were found in 12 of 51 patients with pernicious anaemia. During gastroscopy, mucosal biopsies for gastrin determination were taken from the antrum and fundus and from the polyps. Patients with high gastrin concentration in the antral mucosa showed high serum gastrin concentrations, while most patients with low antral gastrin concentrations also had low serum gastrin values. On an average, the gastrin concentrations in the antrum were approximately 10 times, and those in the fundus approximately 100 times, higher than the corresponding values obtained in a reference group. The gastrin content in the polyps was not different from that in the surrounding antral mucosa. This study suggests that the polyps are not due to a functional hypertrophy of the antral mucosa caused by locally increased production of gastrin.

BACKGROUND: Elevated risk of cancers of the stomach, colon, and buccal cavity, as well as of lymphoma and leukemia, have been reported for patients with pernicious anemia in case reports and hospital-based and cross-sectional studies.
METHODS: A cohort of 2021 men and 2496 women living in the Uppsala health care region in Sweden, discharged with a hospital diagnosis of pernicious anemia from 1965 to 1983, was followed for 20 years for subsequent risk of cancer.
RESULTS: A total of 553 cancers were diagnosed among these patients, significantly more than expected based on cancer standardized incidence rates (SIRs) in the general population (SIR = 1.4; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.2-1.5). Most prominent were excesses for cancer of the stomach (SIR = 2.9; 95% CI, 2.4-3.5), esophagus (SIR = 3.2; 95% CI, 1.8-5.2), and pancreas (SIR = 1.7; 95% CI, 1.2-2.4) among men and women; myeloid leukemia among men (SIR = 4.4; 95% CI, 1.8-5.2); and multiple myeloma among women (SIR = 2.5; 95% CI, 1.1-4.9). An excess of gastric carcinoid tumors also was evident in this cohort. The risk of stomach cancer was highest in the first year after diagnosis of pernicious anemia (SIR = 7.4; 95% CI, 5.3-10.1), but an increased risk persisted throughout the follow-up period. The risk of esophageal cancer also remained elevated throughout the study period, although the risk of pancreatic cancer dropped off after 5 years.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the excess risk of gastric carcinoma and carcinoid tumors associated with pernicious anemia, and suggests that the susceptibility state may extend to esophageal and other cancers.

To assess the value of gastroscopic cancer surveillance of patients with pernicious anaemia, 56 patients were re-endoscoped and biopsied after three years. In addition, changes in the density of fundic mucosal endocrine cells were evaluated morphometrically. Two cases (3.6%) of early gastric cancer and two cases of small gastric carcinoid tumours (3.6%) were detected in addition to the five carcinoids that had been found at the initial endoscopic screening. Nodular argyrophil cell hyperplasia and morphometric density of argyrophil cells were not stable phenomena: nodular hyperplasias regressed in five patients, remained similar in six, and progressed to a small carcinoid tumour in one. Serum gastrin concentrations did not correlate well with changes in the endocrine cell density. Regular endoscopic surveillance for gastric cancer may be beneficial and realistic in young patients with pernicious anaemia while the importance of fundic endocrine cell hyperplasia and that of small gastric carcinoids need further study.

From 1986 through 1992, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) released information comparing patient death rates at individual hospitals. This was viewed widely as an effort to aid consumers in selecting hospitals. This study evaluates how the release of this information affected hospital utilization, as measured by discharges. It finds a very small, but statistically significant effect of the HCFA data release. A hospital with an actual death rate twice that expected by HCFA had fewer than one less discharge per week in the first year. However, press reports of single, unexpected deaths were associated with an average 9% reduction in hospital discharges within one year. HCFA was justified in eliminating its mortality report, not because it was being used by consumers to choose hospitals, but because it was not. Implications for report cards are discussed.
Many large U.S. companies have transformed their procurement of health benefits in the 1990s by combining the principles of managed competition with other business tactics to create a business-savvy hybrid of the private sector's own design, often referred to as "value purchasing." Until recently, few policymakers or health care observers believed that large firms would be a force in health system reform. Yet to implement value purchasing, the large companies in this study created new organizational forms, provided employees with financial incentives to select low-cost health plans, and used business tactics such as competitive bidding to negotiate more favorable rates and to improve quality among health plans. The financial results were impressive for the companies studied. In addition, the companies' demands on the health care delivery system are multiplying as the interface between business firms and health care organizations changes. These demands will only increase as the practices we found become more widespread.

Judging the quality of health care that a plan delivers so consumers can make informed purchasing decisions is at the heart of the major federal health reform proposals. Health care "report cards" are an important step in this direction. But they cannot, by themselves, inform consumers or improve health system performance.

To determine the effect of survey-based, health plan report cards on employees as they selected their 1995 health plan, the authors surveyed two groups of Minnesota State employees, one of which received the report card and one that did not. Both groups were surveyed before and after their enrollment. The authors looked for report card effects on relative changes in the employees' knowledge of health plan benefits and their ratings of quality and cost attributes, as well as their plan choice, rates of switching plans, and willingness to pay higher premiums. The only report card effect found was an increase in perceived knowledge for employees with single coverage.

This study explores consumers' comprehension of quality indicators appearing in health care report cards. Content analyses of focus group transcripts show differences in understanding individual quality indicators and among three populations: privately insured; Medicaid; and uninsured. Several rounds of coding and analysis assess: the degree of comprehension; what important ideas are not understood; and what exactly is not understood about the indicator (inter-rater reliability exceeded 94 percent). Thus, this study is an educational diagnosis of the comprehension of currently disseminated quality indicators. Fifteen focus groups (5 per insurance type) were conducted with a total of 104 participants. Findings show that consumers with differing access to and experiences with care have different levels of comprehension. Indicators are not well understood and are interpreted in unintended ways. Implications and strategies for communicating and disseminating quality information are discussed.

The objectives of the study were to identify factors associated with utilisation of antenatal care facilities in a rural population in South India. A community-based, cross-sectional questionnaire study of 30 randomly selected areas was used. A total of 1254 women (95%) had at least one antenatal care visit. The median number of visits was four. High utilisation of antenatal care facilities was associated with low parity and adverse obstetrical history, short distance to healthcare facilities and literacy. It was concluded that antenatal care coverage was high. Information about the above few aspects can be used to target women who are at risk of getting inadequate antenatal care.

Women of childbearing age in a rural community in Kano state were interviewed to ascertain the determinants of utilization of antenatal care services in the village. Of the 200 women studied, 118 (59%) utilized antenatal care services during pregnancy. A majority (86%) of those who attained secondary school education, all of those with post-secondary education and 83% of those whose husbands had post-secondary education utilized antenatal care services.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical effectiveness of low fluoride (F) toothpastes, containing 600 ppm or less, with toothpaste containing 1,000 ppm or more fluoride in preventing dental caries.
DESIGN: Systematic review of randomised controlled trials comparing low fluoride toothpastes containing 600 ppm F or less with toothpastes containing 1,000 ppm or more in children or adults.
RESULTS: Seven randomised controlled trials were included. These were categorised into two groups depending on the fluoride concentration in the low fluoride group (250 and 500 ppm) and analysed separately. 250 PPM: Results of the meta-analysis were statistically significant (p = 0.002 and 0.0005) and in favour of the control group (1,000 ppm). DFS increments in the 250-ppm group were 0.6-0.7 greater than the 1,000-ppm group. 500 PPM: Only two studies were in this category, and one of them failed to present the baseline caries levels, so a meta-analysis was not carried out.
CONCLUSION: 250 ppm fluoride dentifrice was not as effective in caries prevention in permanent dentition as dentifrice containing 1,000 ppm F or more. More studies have to be carried out to test the anticaries efficacy of 500 against 1,000 ppm and above.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found that psychological interventions were effective in decreasing alcohol use in patients diagnosed with psychotic disorders. The paucity of available data and the limited quality of some of the included trials means the reliability of the authors' conclusions is unclear.
A prospective randomized pilot study of subcutaneous low-dose heparin in the prevention of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism was carried out in patients admitted to hospital after intracerebral hemorrhage. A high incidence of deep-vein thrombosis and lung embolism was detected by phleboscintigraphy and lung perfusion scintigraphy, respectively. There was no significant reduction of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in the therapy group. Heparin did not increase the risk of rebleeding.
The National Bariatric Surgery Registry (NBSR) results reflect low perioperative risk for obesity surgery. Five deaths occurred within 40 d of operation in 5178 patients (0.1%). A subset of 3174 patients with complete information for complication and postoperative hospital stay was further studied. Females comprised 87% of the data set. Median values were determined for age, 37 y (18-70 y); operative weight, 121 kg (77-288 kg); and operative body mass index (BMI), 44 kg/m2 (29-91 kg/m2). Patients with no complications (89.7%) were reported to have a median postoperative stay of 4 d (2-23 d). The most severe complications were deep venous thrombosis (0.3%) and gastrointestinal leak (0.6%), with median postoperative hospital stay of 12 d (ranges 2-27 and 4-59 d, respectively). The most frequent complication reported was respiratory (4.5%), with median postoperative stay of 6 d (3-34 d). Median postoperative hospital stay for wound infection (1.6%) was 5 d.
Obesity has been considered as a high risk factor in the development of thromboembolism. To test the validity of this hypothesis, the records of 564 morbidly obese patients who underwent gastric bypass for control of their obesity were reviewed. Four patients, 0.7 per cent, had proved fatal pulmonary emboli and three demonstrated detectable, but not fatal, embolization. Fifty-seven patients were studied prospectively with Doppler examinations of the lower extremities, and only one patient had a transient abnormality of venous thrombosis of the calf, which proved to be associated with a nonfatal pulmonary embolus. The morbidly obese patients are not at high risk from thromboembolism, and the prophylactic use of low dose heparin, which may increase known wound morbidity, is discouraged. Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities, however, has proved usefulness to differentiate deep venous thrombosis of the lower extremity from other causes of pain in the leg of the morbidly obese.
The occurrence of side effects and epileptic seizures and the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine (CBZ) and carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide were studied using a slow-release CBZ preparation, Neurotol slow, and a conventional CBZ preparation, Tegretol. The study was an open, randomized cross-over trial, with a 2 week study period for each preparation. Tegretol was given 3 times and Neurotol slow twice a day. The earlier CBZ dose was kept unchanged. The initial sample consisted of 24 adult epileptic patients receiving CBZ treatment of whom 20 patients were evaluable. The fluctuation in serum CBZ concentrations did not differ significantly between the 2 treatment periods, even though the interdose interval of Neurotol slow was 4 h longer than that of Tegretol. The switch-over from conventional CBZ to the slow-release formulation did not seem to alter the efficacy and side effects of CBZ. By using Neurotol slow instead of a conventional CBZ preparation, Tegretol, it is evidently possible to reduce the dosing frequency from 3 times a day to twice daily administrations.
A multi-institutional study was performed to evaluate the appropriate duration of oral administration of Carmofur (1-hexylcarbamoyl-5-fluorouracil, HCFU), a 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) derivative, for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with colorectal cancer undergoing curative operation. Patients were divided into two: i) short duration group receiving 6 months of HCFU administration and ii) long duration group receiving 1 year of the administration, using a centralized registration system. Among 364 patients entered in this study, 293 evaluable cases were analyzed to investigate the appropriate duration of adjuvant oral chemotherapy. No statistical differences were found in the cumulative 5-year disease-free or survival rates between the groups. However, the actual duration of oral HCFU administration differed in the patients of short and long duration groups from the protocol. Namely, more than 70% of the patients received a different duration of oral adjuvant chemotherapy in each of the groups. Therefore, apart from this division of two groups, correlation between the actual duration of oral HCFU administration and the prognosis was examined in these patients. As a result, it was suggested that oral adjuvant chemotherapy with HCFU would be effective in colon cancer patients when the duration of administration exceeded 330 days. In rectal cancer patients, however, adjuvant chemotherapy with HCFU alone was considered to be not sufficient to affect the prognosis.
PURPOSE: To investigate the optimal duration of oral HCFU administration for minimization of side effects induced by long-term administration. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In total, 155 patients allocated to two groups of different duration of the therapy were reviewed: twice or three times per day doses of oral HCFU (8 mg/Kg body weight/day) for 3 months vs. 12 months. RESULTS: Though statistically significant difference was not found in cumulative survival and disease-free rates between the groups due to so many violations of duration of therapy, when reanalyzing the variables in order of real duration of therapy, those rates were significantly higher in patients treated for 300 and more days than less than 300 days (g-Wilcoxon test: p < 0.04). No significant difference was observed in the background factors between the groups. CONCLUSION: At least 300 days is suggested to be necessary to obtain the optimal effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy for curatively resected colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND: Early single-session psychological interventions, including psychological debriefing following trauma, have not been shown to reduce psychological distress. Longer early psychological interventions have shown some promise. AIMS: To examine the efficacy of a four-session cognitive-behavioural intervention following physical injury. METHOD: A total of 152 patients attending an accident and emergency department displaying psychological distress following physical injury were randomised 1-3 weeks post-injury to a four-session cognitive-behavioural intervention that started 5-10 weeks after the injury or to no intervention and then followed up for 13 months. RESULTS: At 13 months, the total Impact of Event Scale score was significantly more reduced in the intervention group (adjusted mean difference=8.4,95% CI 2.4-14.36). Other differences were not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: A brief cognitive-behavioural intervention reduces symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder in individuals with physical injury who display initial distress.
The aim of this study was to index the long-term benefits of early provision of cognitive behavior therapy to trauma survivors with acute stress disorder. Civilian trauma survivors (n = 80) with acute stress disorder were randomly allocated to either cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) or supportive counseling (SC) - 69 completed treatment, and 41 were assessed four years post-treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with the Clinician Administered PTSD Scale. Two CBT patients (8%) and four SC patients (25%) met PTSD criteria at four-year follow-up. Patients who received CBT reported less intense PTSD symptoms, and particularly less frequent and less avoidance symptoms, than patients who received SC. These findings suggest that early provision of CBT in the initial month after trauma has long-term benefits for people who are at risk of developing PTSD.
Acute stress disorder (ASD) is a precursor of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Twenty-four participants with ASD following civilian trauma were given 5 sessions of either cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) or supportive counseling (SC) within 2 weeks of their trauma. Fewer participants in CBT (8%) than in SC (83%) met criteria for PTSD at posttreatment. There were also fewer cases of PTSD in the CBT condition (17%) than in the SC condition (67%) 6 months posttrauma. There were greater statistically and clinically significant reductions in intrusive, avoidance, and depressive symptomatology among the CBT participants than among the SC participants. This study represents the 1st demonstration of successful treatment of ASD with CBT and its efficacy in preventing chronic PTSD.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the value of covering colostomy for patients undergoing low anterior resection for rectal neoplasms. DESIGN: Prospective randomised study. SETTING: Two university hospitals, Finland. SUBJECTS: 38 patients with air-tight stapled end-to-end anastomoses and complete anastomotic tissue rings were randomly allocated to have a covering colostomy (n = 19) or not. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Postoperative mortality, anastomotic leaks, reoperations for leaks. RESULTS: The clinical leak rate was 24% (9/38) and six patients (16%) had radiological leaks. The total number of leaks (clinical and radiological together) was similar in the two groups, 7/19 compared with 8/19, respectively. There were fewer clinical leaks in the colostomy group (3/19; 16% compared with 6/19; 32%), but the difference was not significant. Reoperations for leaks were necessary more often in patients who did not have a covering colostomy (6/19; 32% compared with 1/19; 5%, p = 0.09). Two patients who did not have a stoma died from the infective complications of their leaks and one died of heart failure in the colostomy group. One patient who had not been given a stoma initially was left with a permanent colostomy after a leak. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that a covering colostomy does not reduce the leak rate after low anterior resection, but prevents most of the severe infective consequences of the leaks.
The need for protective transverse colostomy in low anterior resection using the EEA stapler was tested in a randomized series of 50 patients, half of whom received peroperative protective colostomy. Gastrografin enema on the tenth postoperative day showed a leakage frequency of 30 per cent in both groups. Clinical leakage was noted in 4 per cent (one patient) in the colostomy group and 12 per cent (three patients) in the noncolostomy group. Protective colostomy was followed by stenosis in nine instances, compared with only two in the noncolostomy group (2 alpha = 0.05). Routine protective colostomy should not be used in low anterior resection when the EEA stapling instrument is used. The occasional clinical leakage, which may appear in the postoperative period, can be revealed by close observation and successfully treated by an emergency colostomy. The majority of patients with anterior resection of the rectum, therefore, can be spared the inconvenience and cost of temporary colostomy.
OBJECTIVES: We have evaluated the efficacy of long-term lamivudine monotherapy in patients with decompensated HBeAg-negative/HBV-DNA positive cirrhosis. METHODS: We analyzed the clinical course and outcome of lamivudine treatment in 30 consecutive cirrhotics and compared with 30 HBV untreated historical HBeAg-negative controls matched for age and gender. RESULTS: Significant clinical improvement, defined as a reduction of at least two points in Child-Pugh score was observed in 23 of the 30 treated patients (76.6%) versus none of the 30 patients in the control group (p < 0.0001) after a mean follow-up of 20.6 +/- 12.1(+/-SD) months. There were 10 deaths in the treated group versus 24 in the control group (p= 0.07). Liver-related deaths occurred in five of the eight patients soon after the development of biochemical breakthrough. Patients with clinical improvement had better survival than patients with no improvement (p= 0.04) or those who developed biochemical breakthrough due to YMDD mutants (p= 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Lamivudine significantly improves liver function in HBeAg-negative decompensated cirrhosis. However, the development of the biochemical breakthrough due to YMDD mutants is associated with fatal outcome.
To determine the efficacy of interferon-alpha 2a in chronic active hepatitis B, 238 patients were randomly divided, into four groups: three groups received either 2.5 MIU m-2, 5.0 MIU m-2 or 10.0 MIU m-2, three times weekly by intramuscular injection for 12-24 weeks; and a control group received no treatment. Patients were followed for up to 12 months after treatment was discontinued. There was a statistically significant difference in response [clearance of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B viral DNA (HBV-DNA)] between treated and untreated patients (37 vs 13%) but no statistically significant difference was seen between treatment groups (33%, 34% and 43% for the 2.5, 5.0 and 10.0 MIU m-2 groups, respectively). A transient rise in transaminases (seroconversion hepatitis) was seen in responders, but levels returned to within the normal range after response to treatment. In patients responding to interferon therapy there was a significant reduction in the severity of the hepatitis. Interferon-alpha 2a was generally well tolerated with respect to vital signs and laboratory parameters.
72 Chinese patients who had been positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) for more than six months with stable serum hepatitis B virus DNA were randomised to receive recombinant alpha 2-interferon at doses of 2.5, 5, or 10 X 10(6) U/m2 intramuscularly thrice weekly for 12-24 weeks, or no treatment. 6 (11%) of 54 treated and 1 (6%) of 18 control patients became HBeAg-negative at the end of therapy or after 24 weeks of follow-up. 9 (17%) of treated but none of the control patients became HBeAg-negative between completion of therapy and 12 months. Reactivation of HBV replication subsequently occurred in 7 (13%) of the treated patients and in 1 control. Thus, sustained clearance of HBeAg was achieved only in 8 (15%) of treated patients at 12 months. Between 12 and 24 months 3 (9%) of treated patients and 1 control became negative for HBeAg. None of the patients became HBsAg-negative. alpha 2-interferon in the dose regimen used has little long-term effect in the suppression of HBV replication in Chinese patients with chronic HBV infection.
The long-term usefulness of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) in chronic hepatitis B remains controversial. To investigate the long-term efficacy of IFN-alpha therapy in chronic hepatitis B, 62 Japanese patients, including 27 patients treated with IFN-alpha (IFN group) and 35 patients without antiviral therapy matched by age and sex as controls (control group), were followed up for 2-14 years. At entry, the serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level in the IFN group was significantly higher than that in the control group (238.6+/-250.1 vs. 142.3+/-152.1 IU/l, P < 0.05). The prevalence of genotype C was 89%, with no difference between the two groups (93 vs. 86%). There was no significant difference in the presence of the precore mutation or the dual core promoter mutations between the IFN and control groups (37 vs. 46%, 74 vs. 66%). After long-term follow-up, the rate of sustained HBeAg seroconversion was comparable in the two groups (33 vs. 31%). Normalization of serum ALT level was seen in 44% of the IFN group and 51% of the control group, with no difference. There was also no difference in the percentage of cases with loss of serum HBV-DNA by PCR assay between the two groups (33 vs. 29%). During follow-up, two patients of the control group and three patients of the IFN group developed cirrhosis, and one of the IFN- treated patients progressed to hepatocellular carcinoma. The results of this long-term follow-up study showed that no benefit of IFN-alpha treatment was detectable during long-term follow-up in Japanese patients with chronic hepatitis B.
Our aim was to compare weekly rufloxacin with daily norfloxacin in the secondary prophylaxis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and to examine changes in antibiotic susceptibility in fecal Escherichia coli. The method used was an open randomized clinical trial including 79 patients who received either norfloxacin 400 mg/day or rufloxacin 400 mg/week and followed up for one year. E. coli counts, quinolone susceptibility, and drug concentrations in feces were investigated in 12 patients. Cumulative one-year probability of peritonitis recurrence was 26% for patients on norfloxacin and 36% for those on rufloxacin (P = 0.16). Norfloxacin was more effective in the prevention of peritonitis recurrence due to Enterobacteriaceae (0% vs 22%, P = .01). At the end of follow-up, all 12 patients had E. coli resistant to quinolones in their feces. In conclusion, weekly rufloxacin is not an alternative to daily norfloxacin in the prevention of peritonitis recurrence. The development of quinolone-resistant E. coli in feces may be an important problem in patients on long-term quinolone prophylaxis.
To assess the efficacy and safety of Adriamycin (Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH) in inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 60 patients were randomized to receive Adriamycin 60 to 75 mg/m2 at 3-week intervals and 46 patients to receive no antitumor therapy. The median survival rate of the Adriamycin group was 10.6 weeks; that of the group receiving no antitumor therapy was 7.5 weeks (P = 0.036). Adriamycin induced tumor regression of 25% to 50% in 5% of patients and of over 50% in only 3.3% of patients. It caused fatal complications (septicemia and cardiotoxicity) in 25% of patients. The severity of neutropenia leading to septicemia for a particular dose was unpredictable. Four of eight patients who developed cardiotoxicity received less than 500 mg/m2 of Adriamycin. We conclude that Adriamycin is not an ideal drug for the treatment of inoperable HCC.
Screening is widely used to detect early hepatocellular carcinoma in Asian patients with cirrhosis. Its effectiveness in Caucasian patients has been suggested, but remains to be proven. Therefore we prospectively studied 118 French patients (68 males, 50 females, age 55 +/- 12) with Child-Pugh A or B cirrhosis (alcoholic in 82) and without detectable hepatocellular carcinoma. The screening program consisted of ultrasound examination of the liver and determination of blood alpha-fetoprotein and des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin levels every 6 months. The median follow up was 36 months (range 4-48). Only four patients were lost to follow up. Fourteen hepatocellular carcinomas were detected, in six cases by ultrasonography alone, in four by alpha-fetoprotein alone, in three by ultrasonography and alpha-fetoprotein and in one case by ultrasonography and des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin, but never by des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin alone. The tumor presented as a unique nodule in nine patients. The tumor was less than 3 cm in diameter without portal thrombosis or metastasis in three cases. Surgery was performed in only one case. In this study, the annual incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma was high (5.8%), but the screening methods used did not effectively identify potentially resectable tumors in Caucasian patients with cirrhosis.
We prospectively monitored 140 cirrhotic patients for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma for 6 yr, using periodical screening by high-resolution convex-array ultrasonography and alpha-fetoprotein. Twenty-eight patients were positive for HBs antigen, 26 patients had received blood transfusions and were negative for HBs antigen and 26 patients had a history of heavy drinking. We detected hepatocellular carcinoma in 40 patients during this period. The overall cumulative incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the 6 yr was 39%; the cumulative incidence was 59% in patients with HBsAg, 53% in patients who had had blood transfusions and were negative for HBsAg and 22% in patients who had a history of heavy drinking and who were without HBsAg. Detection of the carcinoma in 85% of these 40 patients was based on results of ultrasonography. Twenty-six of the patients (65%) had a small hepatocellular carcinoma of 2 cm or less. alpha-Fetoprotein levels were lower than 100 ng/ml in 56% of these 40 patients. Patients with cirrhosis are at high risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma, especially patients with HBsAg or with a history of blood transfusion who are negative for HBsAg. Periodic monitoring by use of ultrasonography in particular is recommended for early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma.
The value of various screening methods in the detection of early hepatocellular carcinoma was investigated in 95 patients with cirrhosis. Infusion hepatic angiography and computed tomography with angiography were performed yearly, ultrasound every 3 months, and determination of serum alpha-fetoprotein levels every 2 months. "Space-occupying lesions" suspicious for hepatocellular carcinoma were found in 13 of the 95 cases (13.7%). Detection rates of "space-occupying lesions" were 77% for infusion hepatic angiography, 77% for computed tomography with angiography and 54% for ultrasonography, respectively. In 8 of the 13 cases, "space-occupying lesions" were subsequently confirmed as hepatocellular carcinoma by operative findings or clinical course. Serum alpha-fetoprotein levels were negative in 3 of the 8 hepatocellular carcinoma-confirmed cases, and 3 of the remaining 5 cases demonstrated levels above 400 ng per ml at the time of diagnosis. A radical resection of hepatocellular carcinoma was successfully performed in two cases. Although it was difficult to differentiate hepatocellular carcinoma from other lesions in the case of "space-occupying lesions" smaller than 2 cm in diameter, the results suggest that regularly scheduled screening may be useful to detect early hepatocellular carcinoma.
15 consecutive persons aged under 50 with an overweight exceeding 75% were examined clinically, biochemically and with liver biopsy after gastric bypass (7 patients) or gastroplasty (8 patients). After 1 year the occurrence of steatosis had fallen from 73 to 40% which, together with a marked decrease in individual gradings of fatty changes, represented a significant regression of the steatosis. Likewise, discrete inflammatory and granulomatous changes largely disappeared. In no case was fibrosis present. Serum alkaline phosphatases preoperatively increased above normal range in 20% but their mean level was significantly reduced after 12 months of weight loss. Other liver function tests remained normal and stable. In contrast to published experience with jejunoileal bypass operations liver steatosis associated with morbid obesity seems to be morphologically and biochemically reversed together with the weight reduction obtained by gastroplasty or gastric bypass.
AIM: To review the literature on capsule endoscopy (CE) for detecting esophageal varices using conventional esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) as the standard. METHODS: A strict literature search of studies comparing the yield of CE and EGD in patients diagnosed or suspected as having esophageal varices was conducted by both computer search and manual search. Data were extracted to estimate the pooled diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. RESULTS: There were seven studies appropriate for meta-analysis in our study, involving 446 patients. The pooled sensitivity and specificity of CE for detecting esophageal varices were 85.8% and 80.5%, respectively. In subgroup analysis, the pooled sensitivity and specificity were 82.7% and 54.8% in screened patients, and 87.3% and 84.7% in the screened/patients under surveillance, respectively. CONCLUSION: CE appears to have acceptable sensitivity and specificity in detecting esophageal varices. However, data are insufficient to determine the accurate diagnostic value of CE in the screen/surveillance of patients alone.
The potential antithrombotic effect of a new low molecular weight heparinoid, Org 10172, was examined in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging pilot study of the prevention of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in 45 high-risk patients having major thoracic or abdominal surgery for cancer. Org 10172 was given in doses of 500, 750 or 1000 U bd subcutaneously. DVT occurred in 9 of 14 patients given placebo and in 4 of 11 patients given 500 U bd but in none of the 20 patients given 750 or 1000 U bd. Operative blood loss and post-operative bleeding were not significantly different between the groups but one patient given 1000 U bd had major post-operative bleeding. Average mid-interval and trough plasma anti-Xa levels reached 0.26 and 0.20 U/ml respectively following the highest dose. It is concluded that Org 10172 is a potentially useful antithrombotic agent and that the effective and safe dose appears to be between 500 and 1000 U bd for prevention of DVT in high-risk patients.
The efficacy of graduated compression stockings in the prevention of postoperative deep vein thrombosis was studied in a randomized, prospective, controlled trial of 200 patients, aged 40 years and over, undergoing abdominal surgery (100 for benign disease, 100 for malignant conditions). Deep vein thrombosis was diagnosed by the 125I-fibrinogen test. The incidence of deep vein thrombosis was 35.9 per cent in the control group (103 patients) and 15.5 per cent in the stockinged group (97 patients) (P less than 0.025). In the patients with benign disease, deep vein thrombosis developed in 24.5 per cent of the control limbs and 6.1 per cent of stockinged limbs (P less than 0.005); in patients with malignant disease the similar figures were 27.9 and 11.5 per cent (P less than 0.05). Increasing age did not alter the efficacy of the stockings. It is concluded that graduated compression stockings provide a safe and effective method of prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis.
A prospective randomized trial is described in 119 patients undergoing major abdominal general surgical procedures. Half of the patients were treated prophylactically with intermittent pneumatic calf compression, begun after the induction of anesthesia and continued until the patient was walking; the other half acted as controls. Deep venous thrombosis was detected by iodine-125 fibrinogen scanning and confirmed by venography, and did not differ significantly in the control and treated groups. One fatal pulmonary embolism occurred in each group. The presence of malignancy of the gastrointestinal tract did not influence the results. The findings suggest that pneumatic compression delayed the development of deep venous thrombosis postoperatively and that perhaps it should be continued until discharge from hospital.
The frequency of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was studied in 98 patients undergoing major abdominal surgery. All the patients received low dose heparin prophylaxis 5000 i.u. every 12 h for 5-7 days. In each patient, a graduated compression stocking was also worn and randomly allocated to one of the legs and the other leg served as a control. DVT was diagnosed by the 125I-fibrinogen method. Four patients developed bilateral DVT and 8 patients unilateral DVT, all of whom developed it in the control leg. The difference in unilateral DVT between stockinged and control legs was significant (P < 0.004). It is concluded that a combination of low dose heparin and graduated compression stockings is more effective than low dose heparin alone in reducing the frequency of postoperative DVT. It is suggested that this combination of prophylaxis might be of value in high risk patients.
The incidence of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was studied by the 125I-fibrinogen technique in 70 patients who had had major abdominal operations and who were wearing graduated static compression stockings on one leg, the patient's other leg being used as a control. In the whole group 7 patients developed bilateral DVT, 19 patients developed unilateral DVT in the control leg and only one patient developed unilateral DVT in the stockinged leg. The difference between stockinged and control legs was highly significant (P = 0-0003). In the 19 patients with malignant disease the incidence of DVT in the stockinged leg remained significantly less (P = 0-037). It is concluded that graduated static compression stockings do reduce the incidence of postoperative deep venous thrombosis.
The physiological effects of static compression of the leg have recently been reinvestigated. Graded compression extending from the ankle to the upper thigh produces the maximum increase in velocity of femoral vein blood flow and the maximum decrease in clearance times of contrast media and radioisotopes from the deep veins of the calf. This type of compression may be easily produced by a specially designed elastic stocking. Graded compression was used in a controlled clinical trial of 98 patients undergoing major operations to assess its effect on isotopically diagnosed deep vein thrombosis. The incidence of deep vein thrombosis was 49% in the control group and 23% in the treated groups. No complications were caused by the stockings. Carefully designed and correctly applied static compression is a safe and effective method of reducing the incidence of deep vein thrombosis.
The effect of low-dose heparin prophylaxis on venous thrombosis and bleeding after major elective surgery was studied in a prospective controlled study of 820 patients. The total incidence of venous thrombosis detected with leg-scanning using fibrinogen labeled with radioactive iodine (125I) was reduced from 16.0% in the control group to 4.2% in treated patients. More important, the incidence of popliteal or femoral vein thrombosis was reduced from 2.9% to 1.0%. Prophylaxis resulted in a slight increase in bleeding-minor wound hematoma, mean volume of blood transfused, and a post-operative hematocrit fall in treated patients. However, increased bleeding was clinically minor, and prophylaxis was well tolerated.
Deep vein thrombosis and its sequel, pulmonary embolus, are possibly the greatest threats to recovery after surgical operation. In a randomized, controlled clinical trial in which the 125I-fibrinogen uptake test, Doppler ultrasound, and phlebography were used for diagnosis, it was found that low doses of calcium heparinate administered subcutaneously and sodium pentosan polysulfate intramuscularly were effective in preventing deep vein thrombosis (DVT), postoperatively. The incidence of DVT was as follows: 9% in the group treated with heparinate; 15% in the group treated with sodium pentosan polysulfate; nad 51% in the untreated control group.
A cost containment program initiated in 1975 on the medical teaching service of an 890-bed university affiliated hospital has led to a significant improvement in house staff utilization of facilities and procedures. During the first three and one-half years of the program the average length of stay on the general medical service was reduced by 21 percent; and the cost per admission rose at a rate of only 4.3 percent per annum, while the cost per admission on other services rose at an average rate of 14.5 percent per year. In the outpatient setting eliminating unnecessary laboratory procedures resulted in an actual reduction in patient-encounter cost initiated by interns despite price increases on all procedures. Overall cost advantage gained by reduction in utilization will rapidly be negated, however, if the current rate of inflation continues.

A two-year prospective study was conducted to determine whether specific educational, organizational, and behavior reinforcing interventions could improve physician performance of selected health maintenance procedures in the private practice setting. The procedures studied included history of tobacco use, blood pressure determination, history of alcohol use, fecal occult blood testing for colon cancer, Pap smears, and physician breast examinations. Overall compliance with these procedures improved from 58 percent to 72 percent. There were marked differences in compliance among the procedures, ranging from 99 percent of patients having their blood pressure recorded to 51 percent having a fecal occult blood screening for colon cancer. Compliance with use of a screening flow sheet was much less than compliance with specific procedures. The screening flow sheet was completed on only 29 percent of patients' charts.

Abdominal massage therapy was once an accepted treatment for constipation. Subsequently interest faded, but recent years have seen a revival of interest in massage. It is therefore timely to ask whether or not it is an effective form of treatment for this condition. Computerized literature searches were carried out to retrieve all controlled clinical trials. Data were extracted in a standardized, pre-defined fashion. Four studies met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. None of the four studies is free of methodological flaws. They are heterogeneous in terms of trial design, patient sample and type of massage used. Nonetheless the results of these trials collectively imply that massage therapy could be a promising treatment for chronic constipation. Future, more rigorous trials should evaluate its true value.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found that adjunctive mechanical devices are safe and associated with better perfusion and decreased embolisation in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Although these conclusions are likely to be reliable, they should be interpreted with some degree of caution as the validity of the primary studies was not assessed and details of the control interventions were not reported.
A systematic review was conducted to determine the efficacy and safety of nitrous oxide for labor analgesia. Eleven randomized controlled trials with adequate control groups and outcome assessment by parturients during or shortly after the intervention were used to determine efficacy. To determine adverse outcome, descriptions found in 8 controlled trials and in 8 observational studies were included. A nonsystematic review of studies on occupational exposure was also conducted. Nitrous oxide is not a potent labor analgesic, but it is safe for parturient women, their newborns, and health care workers in attendance during its administration. It appears to provide adequately effective analgesia for many women.

This article describes a systematic literature review on whether, how, and when to perform preoperative hair removal. By searching electronic databases and reference lists of relevant articles, team members identified 20 clinical studies that deal with preoperative hair removal. No strong evidence was found to advocate against preoperative hair removal. Furthermore, there was strong evidence to recommend that when hair removal is considered necessary, shaving should not be performed. Instead a depilatory or electric clipping, preferably immediately before surgery, should be used.

The popularization and application of treatment for intravenous thrombolysis and primary percutaneous coronary intervention, significantly reducing the incidence of complications and mortality in acute myocardial infarction (AMI), but how to reduce the occurrence of cardiac ischemic events and improve the long-term prognosis of patients, is still the.1996-1998 years of the hot issues of the cardiovascular disease prevention research field of blood stasis and phlegm diarrhea turbidity and the Yiqihuoxue treatment of AMI clinical comparison of observational studies, found that the blood stasis and phlegm diarrhea turbidity treatment of AMI, the reduction ofpatients with post-infarction angina, arrhythmias, heart failure, there is a definite advantage. are reported below.
CRD COMMENTARY: The authors have clearly stated their research question and some inclusion and exclusion criteria. The literature search appears thorough. The quality of the included studies was formally assessed and the authors have also reported on how the articles were selected, and how many of the reviewers were involved in the data selection and quality assessment.
The data extraction is reported in tables and text. Across studies the effect sizes ranged from 34 to 73% which suggests heterogeneity between studies. The authors suggest that this could be due to differences in the included patients (e.g. patients with different types of erectile dysfunction (organic, non-organic, psychogenic). Because of the variability across results, statistical pooling was not appropriate.
No normal contraceptive method is cent per cent reliable and efficacious. Therefore, the need for emergency contraception as a back-up method to prevent unwanted pregnancy
following failure of regular contraceptives like, missed OCPs, expelled lUCDs or slipped condoms has more relevance. The existing awareness of the common people about EC methods is very low. The present study has been designed to evaluate the use and misuse of emergency contraceptives among women who are adopting condom as their primary contraceptive method. The study results demonstrated that subjects, once properly counseled, would not like to misuse the emergency contraceptive even if it is available in advance.
To evaluate the evidence for the use of spiral volumetric computed tomography (SVCT) in the diagnosis of acute pulmonary embolism (PE), the 11 English-language studies published through July 1998 that compared SVCT with a reference standard for PE were systematically reviewed. Among the reviewed studies, methodological problems were common. Only 5 of these studies fulfilled 5 of 11 basic standards addressing important issues in diagnostic test research. The reported sensitivities of SVCT compared with pulmonary angiography varied widely (64%-93%), which was likely the result of differences in study populations. Spiral volumetric computed tomography may be relatively sensitive and specific for diagnosing central pulmonary artery PEs, but it is insensitive for diagnosing subsegmental clots. Spiral volumetric computed tomography may have a role as a "rule-in" test for large central emboli, but additional research is required to establish its place in clinical practice.

During the last two decades, knowledge has increased significantly regarding the treatment of acute pain. One of these advances has been the implementation of multidisciplinary Acute Pain Services in the hospital setting to take on accountability for acute pain management. Acute Pain Services are expanding rapidly in the Canadian health care system. Nurse administrators will be increasingly called upon to help with the establishment and evaluation of these programs. The purpose of this study was to examine the effectiveness of, and staff satisfaction with, one Canadian Acute Pain Service. Results of the study indicated that staff were generally satisfied with the Acute Pain Service and felt that the program had made a significant impact on the treatment of acute pain within the hospital; although improvements in pain outcomes were not noted. Adequate communication mechanisms and resources to allow for appropriate workload, education and clinical support are critical to the development and success of an Acute Pain Service.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that low molecular weight heparin could not be recommended routinely and that further trials were required to test patient-specific endpoints. The authors' conclusions were appropriate for the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of low-dose oral misoprostol compared with dinoprostone, vaginal misoprostol and oxytocin for labour induction in women with a viable foetus and found it to be at least as effective as both vaginal misoprostol and vaginal dinoprostone. Although aspects of the review were unclear, it was of a sufficient standard and the conclusion may be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone with benzodiazepines (licensed and used in the UK) for the short-term management of insomnia. The authors concluded that short-acting drugs (Z-drugs) seemed equally effective and safe, but that there was a clear need for further research in this area. The authors suggested interpreting the findings with considerable caution, and their recommendation for further research seems appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that fixed time reinforcer delivery (plus extinction and schedule thinning) was the most efficacious treatment identified for behavioural problems in individuals with developmental disabilities. Reporting of the review process was poor. The conclusion is likely to be reliable, but the lack of data for alternative treatments prevented their accurate assessment.
CRD SUMMARY: Emergency stent-graft repair appeared to be a reasonable solution for patients with acute aortic rupture into airways. However, due to the risks of longer term recurrence and mortality, it should be considered as a bridge to subsequent elective repair. The authors acknowledged the possibility of publication bias and the lower quality of included studies, consequently their conclusions seem reasonable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the overall survival rate, local-regional recurrence and postoperative mortality of patients with resectable oesophageal adenocarcinoma may be improved by neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, with no apparent increase in the complication rate.  Overall, these findings appear to be supported by the data presented, although there is some risk that relevant data may have been missed.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that surgical treatment must be considered the standard treatment for severe carotid artery stenosis as there was no evidence that endovascular treatment was safer and it did not provide a better short-term outcome. Problems with review methodology, particularly the lack of validity assessment, mean that it is difficult to determine the reliability of this conclusion.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that reminiscence in general and life review in particular were potentially effective interventions for the enhancement of psychological wellbeing in older adults, but further research was needed. However, given concerns about some aspects of the review methodology and the inclusion of variable quality studies with small sample sizes, the authors' conclusions should be viewed with caution. 
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that it is unclear whether restricting vancomycin use is effective in reducing vancomycin-resistant enterococcus colonisation and infection in U.S. hospitals. Although the search was somewhat restricted and more steps could have been taken to minimise the risk of bias during the review process, given the apparent lack of well-designed studies these cautious conclusions appear justified.
CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the effectiveness and safety of ritodrine hydrochloride in delaying delivery and decreasing the incidence of pre-term birth. Ritodrine may be useful for the short-term prolongation of pregnancy, but the high incidence of adverse reactions means that administration should be limited. The authors' conclusions reflect the evidence presented but the studies may be of poor quality.
CRD SUMMARY: This was a generally well-conducted meta-analysis exploring the risk of thrombocytopenia in patients prescribed low-molecular-weight heparin or unfractionated heparin for venous thromboembolism. The authors performed a thorough quality assessment of the included studies and used appropriate statistical methods to combine the data. The conclusions seem reliable based on the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there is little evidence to support a link between the use of corticosteroids or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and the risk of developing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. However, the reliability of the review's findings is unclear given the poor reporting of review methods and the potential methodological weaknesses of the study data.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the diagnostic accuracy of antigranulocyte scintigraphy with monoclonal antibodies for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. The authors concluded that the sensitivity was 81% and the specificity 77%, so the method, while useful, cannot completely replace established methods. Although the review was rigorously conducted, the conclusions represent an over-interpretation of the results from a relatively small number of patients and may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review determined the occurrence of invasive cancer after treatment for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and the rate of post-treatment CIN. The authors found a persistently high long-term risk of invasive cervical cancer after treatment for CIN, whereas the rate of post-treatment CIN showed a steady decrease over time. The review has some methodological weaknesses but the authors' cautious conclusions appear reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that St. John's Wort was effective for the treatment of mild to moderate depression in comparison with placebo and equivalent to taking pharmaceutical antidepressants. However, the small sample sizes, variations between studies and failure to report levels of statistical significance mean that the results may not be reliable. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review, which assessed the effectiveness of sexually transmitted infection (STI) prevention interventions for adolescents in different settings, concluded that certain components, such as condom use, appear to successfully reduce risk behaviours, but targeting of populations is needed to optimise future interventions. The authors appear to have considered the limitations of the included studies and their conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that transcranial magnetic stimulation shows a significant modest positive effect, and that electroconvulsive therapy may also have a significant effect, on the motor function of patients with Parkinson's disease. These conclusions should be regarded with some caution, mainly because of a lack of information on the included studies.
This article presents results of a randomized controlled trial examining the efficacy of Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) for treating disruptive behaviors of young children (ages 3 to 6) with mental retardation (MR) and comorbid oppositional defiant disorder. Thirty families were randomly assigned to an immediate treatment (IT) or waitlist (WL) control group. Results indicated that IT mothers interacted more positively with their children after treatment than WL mothers, and their children were more compliant after treatment. On parent-report measures, IT mothers reported fewer disruptive behaviors at home and lower parenting stress related to difficult child behavior than WL mothers after treatment. Whether evidence-based treatments for disruptive behavior require modification before application to children with MR is discussed.

CRD SUMMARY: This review determined the effect of selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors and traditional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on the risk of vascular events. The authors concluded that selective COX-2 inhibitors are associated with a moderate increase in the risk of vascular events. The lack of detail makes it difficult to judge the extent to which variation between the studies impacted upon the results.
To determine the efficacy of azathioprine in the treatment of Crohn's disease, a 26-week double-blind trial was performed. 20 patients with Crohn's disease, requiring at least 10 mg of prednisone/day over the 3 months prior to entering the study were randomized into placebo (10 patients) and major criterion of success in the trial. There were 7 relapses in the placebo group (5 patients) and 2 relapses in the azathioprine group (2 patients). Complications including fistulae were not affected by the medications. The mean reduction in steriod dosage in the azathioprine group at the end of the trial (-15.5 mg) was greater than in the placebo group (-6.1 mg). These results suggest that azathioprine may permit reduction or discontinuation of steroids without the worsening of symptoms in some patients who appear to require steroids for control of their symptoms. The clinical features of this "AZA-responsive subgroup" remain to be defined.

CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the effects of coping interventions for people with rheumatic diseases. The authors concluded that limited positive effects on quality of life were found with group interventions teaching self-management skills or skills in dealing with pain and stress; further research was recommended. This was a well-conducted systematic review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
The efficacy of phenytoin in the treatment of the symptoms of diabetic symmetrical polyneuropathy has been tested in a double-blind, crossover study. Symptoms were evaluated daily by linear analogue self-assessment, while control of blood glucose and plasma phenytoin level were monitored on a weekly basis. There was no significant improvement in symptoms on phenytoin, whether analyzed in aggregate, as pain alone, or on the last 3 days of each treatment week. Blood glucose, however, was elevated in diabetic patients taking phenytoin, and the incidence of undesirable side effects was increased. It is concluded that phenytoin has no role in the treatment of diabetic symmetrical polyneuropathy.

Germany has recently introduced a system of Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs) to engender more appropriate resource allocation. The following article describes the German DRG-system and the methodologies used to determine prices. It analyses the extent to which prices, or calculated cost weights, reflect the actual costs incurred by hospitals for their respective services. We reveal that a "compression" of DRG cost weights occurs, and that the data sample used to calculate cost weights is lacking in terms of its representativeness. Although cost data accuracy has improved over the last few years there are still a number of challenges that need to be addressed.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the risk of bleeding associated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs given to relieve pain after tonsillectomy. The authors concluded that these drugs increase the risk of needing an operation to stop bleeding and should not be used after tonsillectomy. Though a small number of studies may potentially have been missed, the conclusions appear appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review looked at the effects of low- or mini-dose warfarin, compared with a regimen where the warfarin dose was adjusted to a target International Normalised Ratio (INR), in people with non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation. The risk of thromboembolic events was higher with low- or mini-dose warfarin. The review appears to have been well conducted and the conclusions are supported by the data presented.
CRD SUMMARY: The review aimed to determine the efficacy of selenium supplementation for environment-associated health disorders. The authors acknowledged the limited methodological quality of the included studies, and appropriately concluded that the results did not provide evidence of a beneficial effect of selenium supplementation in environmental health disorders.
CRD SUMMARY: This review determined the accuracy of noninvasive imaging for diagnosing carotid stenosis in patients with carotid territory ischaemic symptoms. The authors' cautious conclusions, that existing data might support the cautious use of noninvasive imaging to diagnose 70 to 99% stenosis by experts in carotid imaging, but more data are needed to determine the accuracy of the commonly used noninvasive imaging tests in routine practice, appear appropriate.
This article explores current research on online cancer support groups. A review of the literature revealed 9 research articles (describing 10 research studies) that focused on computer-mediated or Internet cancer support groups. The researchers in 9 of the 10 studies concluded that online cancer support groups helped people cope more effectively with their disease. Most of the research studies had small sample sizes. Six of the 10 studies did not include men, and six focused on Caucasian women with breast cancer. Information seeking/giving was prevalent in the online groups. Gender differences, negative psychological effects, and barriers to using online groups were identified. The few studies that were found in the literature suffered from a lack of experimental design, small and homogenous samples, and lack of outcome measures, thereby limiting applicability of results.

CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the clinical outcome after treatment of coronary in-stent restenosis. Treatment of in-stent restenosis was associated with an overall 30% rate of major adverse cardiac events. The review's findings should be interpreted with caution given the lack of clarity in the statistical analysis, the lack of details on included studies and a confusing presentation of the results.
The object of the study was to evaluate the research designs of social support interventions for prevention of low birth weight (LBW). A literature search of published articles identified 12 randomized controlled trials of social support to prevent LBW birth. These were evaluated using specific methodological criteria for effective intervention research. Only one study showed a significant reduction in LBW. However, none of the studies met all of the proposed criteria for rigorous intervention research. It is premature to conclude that social support interventions are ineffective in preventing LBW. Specific recommendations for future intervention research design are outlined.

BACKGROUND: Relatives in families where a child has a neural tube defect (NTD) may be at higher risk of having an affected child. Little is known of their level of knowledge and use of folic acid.
AIM: To carry out an intervention study intended to increase knowledge and use of folic acid among relatives.
METHODS: One hundred aunts and female first cousins (relatives of the proband) were interviewed by telephone before and after receiving an information pack.
RESULTS: At baseline, although knowledge of the benefits of folic acid was high (73%), use of folic acid was low (8.8%). After the intervention, knowledge increased and use went up to 19% (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that relatives in Irish NTD families have a high level of information about folic acid benefits. This awareness may not translate into action since the intervention produced only a modest increase in folic acid use overall. Future studies focussing on women who are planning a pregnancy may show larger benefits from intervention.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that the potential role for statin therapy in the prevention of haematological malignancies was not supported with the meta-analysis. Despite some minor limitations, this conclusion appears to reflect the evidence presented and is likely to be reliable.
Employees from 61 worksites were matched in terms of size and type, and then randomly assigned to one of three conditions that received: (a) self-help manuals, (b) self-help manuals and incentives, or (c) self-help manuals, incentives, and social support groups. The intervention incorporating manuals, incentives, and groups significantly enhanced perceived control over stressors across all time points, and perceived control facilitated successful quitting. Participants who were able to quit smoking perceived less stress in their lives and were able to decrease their initial stress levels. Successful quitters also used less emotion-focused coping than participants who were not able to quit, and their increase in problem-focused coping facilitated quitting.
Stress, coping, and appraisal were explored in order to better understand the factors associated with smoking cessation. Employees from 61 worksites received one of three programs which incorporated the use of self-help manuals, incentives, social support groups, and cognitive-behavioral techniques. Results indicated successful quitters perceived less stress in their lives, used more problem-focused coping and less emotion-focused coping, and perceived more control over their stressors than participants who were not able to quit smoking.
A significantly lower proportion of the patients in the Jay group (25%) experienced pressure ulcer formation during the three months of observation as compared to the foam group (41%). No statistically significant differences were found between groups on the location, severity, or healing duration of the pressure ulcers. Most lesions (65%) were limited to persistent erythema of intact skin, and healed in three to four weeks. Significantly higher proportions of patients in the Jay groups (7%) rejected their cushion because of discomfort as compared to foam (1%). The incidence of pressure ulcers was significantly higher among those patients who experienced peak interface pressures recorded at 60 mmHg or higher, had low Norton scores (< or = 11), or were malnourished.

This randomised controlled trial of two dry-flotation pressure-reducing surfaces evaluates pressure sore incidence, patient comfort and the appropriate use of equipment in 100 orthopaedic patients. The trial involved five full Roho mattresses, five Sofflex mattresses and 10 Roho Quatro cushions to be used to complement the beds. Given the low rate of pressure sore incidence in this high-risk group it is not possible to determine whether there is any difference in effectiveness between the two mattresses. Both appear to provide similar levels of comfort, with the majority of patients finding them either comfortable or very comfortable. The initial setting of the equipment was, however, unsatisfactory.

This article describes a research study that compared the effectiveness of two pressure-reducing devices in a group of elderly nursing home residents. The results obtained revealed no significant differences between the two devices--an air-filled overlay and a gel mattress--in terms of pressure ulcer incidence, severity, and healing. Several factors contributed to these results and illustrate the problems encountered when preventing pressure ulcer development in a group of elderly, debilitated nursing home residents. These factors include ease of use of the pressure-reducing device, caregiver and facility characteristics, and critical patient variables. Until these variables are addressed, it is impossible for any device to be effective in preventing pressure ulcer development in nursing homes.

Understanding the efficacy of patient support surfaces is essential if pressure sore management is to be both efficient and effective. However, laboratory and clinical studies in this area are fraught with well recognized problems. This investigation reports a combination of laboratory, randomized controlled trial (efficacy data) and measures of effectiveness to illustrate the beneficial role of a new dynamic integrated mattress and seat cushion system: the Pegasus Trinova. Successful prevention of sores among a vulnerable patient population, along with positive comments regarding the system's comfort and 'user-friendliness' are supported by laboratory measures of interface pressure to provide a hierarchy of data. Such an approach may present one solution to the lack of timeliness of most mattress clinical trials, thus allowing decisions regarding new support surfaces to be made upon the basis of evidence, not on anecdote or solely upon marketing claims.

Smoking cessation guideline development has become widespread, outpacing guideline implementation efforts. To address this problem, HealthPartners undertook a randomized trial of strategies to enhance compliance of a smoking cessation guideline. The intervention aimed at clinic leadership resulted in significantly more compliance, as measured by physicians coding &quot;tobacco use&quot; on a billing form. The intervention aimed at all clinic physicians had no significant effect. The study suggests that smoking cessation guideline efforts should focus on clinic leadership and system changes rather than on all staff physicians.
In July 2003, New York State implemented the Clean Indoor Air Act (CIAA) to reduce exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS). In this cross-sectional study, workers (n=168) completed an interview assessing ETS exposure and provided urine for cotinine analysis. Hospitality workers recruited after implementation of the CIAA had significant reductions in ETS exposure and urine cotinine, compared with those recruited before implementation. The New York State CIAA yielded measurable reductions in ETS exposure for hospitality workers.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of integrated liposomal prostagladin E 1 (Lipo PGE 1) and fosinopril on early diabetic nephropathy (DN) and clinical DN. METHODS: 86 patients of type 2 diabetic patients with DN were randomly divided into control group (fosinopril) and treated group (fosinopril + Lipo PGE 1). UARE, Scr and BUN figures were compared between two groups before treatment and eight weeks after treatment. RESULTS: UAER had been decreased significantly in both groups (P 0.05, P 0.01), and more significantly in treated group than in control group (P 0.05). Scr had been decreased significantly in treated group (P0.01), while no significant decrease of Scr had been found in control group during the follow-up (P 0.05). Furthermore, no significant decrease of BUN, FBG, MPA, TC and TG had been found in both groups. CONCLUSION: Integrated Lipo PGE 1 and fosinopril can ameliorate proteinuria and improve renal function of the patients with early DN and clinical DN of normal renal function.
Sixty-two patients with mycologically confirmed tinea pedis received two different treatment regimens of ketoconazole 2% cream on a randomized double-blind basis for 1 month with weekly evaluations. A 4-week posttreatment follow-up permitted an assessment of recurrence or improvement. After 1 month of treatment, 90% of the patients treated once daily responded clinically, in comparison with 83% of those treated twice daily. The cure rate was 63% for the once-daily and 60% for the twice-daily group. This rate substantially improved at follow-up (77% and 73%, respectively). One patient from each group discontinued therapy for an adverse reaction. On the basis of both clinical and mycologic assessments, topical treatment with ketoconazole 2% cream was effective as a once-daily therapy.

A clinical trial of the pyrethroid permethrin in 1% lotion was performed on 20 children. Ten were treated for 10 minutes and 10 for 2 hours. All lice washed off the heads of children treated for 2 hours were dead immediately after treatment. Twenty-four percent of the lice removed from one child treated for 10 minutes were still alive 2 hours later. The ovicidal effect was similar in both groups, with egg mortality 88% and 90% following 10-minute and 2-hour treatment, respectively. The mortality of untreated control eggs was 14% and 11%, respectively.

A lotion containing 0.5% malathion was compared with its vehicle (control) in a double-blind, parallel-group study of 119 patients with head louse infestations confirmed by live ova in the hair. The lotions remained in place for 8 hours. The test preparation was superior to the control lotion by a highly significant margin (p less than 0.001) as determined by the numbers of patients with live lice at 24 hours and 7 days after removal of the respective materials. It also proved superior to the vehicle (p less than 0.001) as an ovicidal agent, judged by comparative differences in hatching rates between nits collected and incubated before treatment and those obtained and incubated after treatment. No adverse reaction occurred.

Latanoprost, a prostaglandin analogue, was given topically to 20 patients with normal pressure glaucoma in a double masked randomized study. Either latanoprost 0.006% or placebo (vehicle) was administered twice a day for 14 days. Latanoprost caused a statistically significant (p < 0.001) reduction in intraocular pressure from a diurnal baseline level of 16.8 to 14.3 mmHg, as measured on day 14. Latanoprost was well tolerated.

In the search for a new and better pertussis vaccine for general vaccination in Sweden, a clinical trial of an adsorbed acellular vaccine from Japan has been performed. The vaccine used was produced by Biken and contained only F-HA and the toxoid of pertussis toxin (LPF). The aims were: To demonstrate the serological response to primary vaccination of this adsorbed acellular vaccine in comparison to a plain whole cell vaccine. To compare the incidence of side reactions between the two types of vaccines and the adjuvant (aluminium phosphate) of the acellular vaccine used as placebo.

CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review concluded that, based on the limitations of the meta-analysis, prophylactic use of nitroglycerin for all patients that undergo endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was not recommended. These conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there were no convincing differences in neurocognitive outcomes between patients who underwent off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting and those who underwent on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting. These conclusions reflected the evidence presented. The review was generally well conducted and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the effectiveness of stentless and stented bioprosthetic valves in patients who underwent aortic valve replacement. The authors concluded that stentless aortic valves improved short-term haemodynamic outcomes,. There was no evidence of impacts on patient morbidity, mortality and resource-related outcomes. Due to the unclear quality of included trials, some caution is warranted when interpreting the authors' conclusion
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared steroid-free and steroid-based immunosuppression after liver transplants. The analysis suggested no short-term detrimental effects with steroid avoidance, but study heterogeneity, short-term follow-up and small trial sizes meant that no firm recommendations could be made. The authors' cautious conclusions appear appropriate, despite some omissions in reporting of methodologies used to extract data and assess study quality.
To evaluate the therapeutic effects of transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) in combination with high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (UHCC), we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis by searching the database. In nine controlled trials with a total of 736 patients, the effect of TACE plus HIFU (group A) was compared with TACE alone (group B) in treating UHCC. Outcomes mainly included tumor response and survival. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated for each relationship from raw study data using the fixed-effect model or the random effect model. We found that group A significantly improved the tumor response and 0.5-, 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival of patients. In conclusion, combined therapy was more therapeutically beneficial. However, considering the strength of the evidence, additional randomized controlled trials are needed before combined therapy can be recommended routinely.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors of this review noted a decrease in mortality over time, but stated that treatment of brain arteriovenous malformations remained associated with considerable risks and incomplete efficacy. They recommended that randomised controlled trials should be conducted to compare different treatments for the condition. This recommendation appears appropriate given that the review located only observational studies (which cannot determine causality).
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the evidence supported use of liquid-based cytology or conventional cytology for cervical cancer screening. More complete evidence is required before human papillomavirus-enhanced primary screening was widely adopted in women aged 30 years or older. These conclusions are likely to be reliable, although potential for language bias should be borne in mind.
We performed a randomized controlled trial of early surgical treatment of contractures in 20 boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, age 4-6 yr. Surgery consisted of release of hip flexors, removal of iliotibial bands, and lengthening of tendo Achilles bilaterally. All patients were monitored for at least 12 months post-randomization, and assessed quantitatively for muscle strength and function. Surgery corrected the deformities, but had no beneficial effect on strength or function. Indeed, data in the second year showed more rapid deterioration of function in some of the operated boys. There appeared to be continued evolution of pathology following surgery, as assessed by sequential muscle ultrasound and muscle biopsy. We cannot recommend this type of surgery as a routine treatment.
A prospective study comparing open and subcutaneous lateral internal sphincterotomy for chronic anal fissure was conducted. One hundred twelve patients were randomized to open (n = 54) or subcutaneous (n = 58) sphincterotomy. There was no significant difference in acute complications between the subcutaneous (8.6 percent) and open (7.4 percent) groups. Postoperative length of stay was significantly shorter for the subcutaneous group (1.7 +/- 0.2 days) than for the open group (2.3 +/- 0.1 days; P less than 0.001). Although the response rate to a pain questionnaire was less than 50 percent, the data suggest a lower level of postoperative pain in the subcutaneous group. Fissure healing was similar between the subcutaneous (96.6 percent) and open (94.4 percent) groups. We conclude that subcutaneous lateral internal sphincterotomy for chronic fissure-in-ano is effective and may result in significantly less postoperative discomfort, shorter postoperative lengths of stay, and a comparable rate of complications compared with the open technique.
Twenty patients with chronic anal fissure were randomized into two groups. Ten patients were treated with lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy and 10 with anal dilatation. Anal dilatation was carried out preoperatively, and at 1 and 3 months after the operation in all patients. Preoperatively there was a significantly increased maximal resting pressure in the 20 fissure patients (80 mmHg median) compared with 20 control subjects (50 mmHg median). Postoperatively a significant decrease in pressure occurred in the dilated group (49 mmHg median p less than 0.05), whereas the pressure was not significantly reduced in the group that underwent sphincterotomy (65 mmHg median p less than 0.05). At 1 year three patients complained of recurrent symptoms of anal fissure in the dilated group compared with one in the sphincterotomy group. Minor continence disturbance was noted in two patients in both groups.
The results of a prospective randomized trial in 111 patients were recorded to compare manual dilatation of the anus with lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy performed under general anesthesia. There was no significant difference in the clinical results nor in the incidence of complications. Persistent or recurrent fissure occurred in three of 59 patients after manual dilatation of the anus and two of 39 patients after lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy, an incidence of 5.1 percent in each group. Only one patient developed serious impairment of continence, and this occurred following lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy (5.1 percent).
Fifty eight patients with idiopathic chronic anal fissure were included in a randomised prospective trial of lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy versus simple anal dilatation carried out as outpatient procedures. Operations were performed under local anaesthesia and the patients reviewed 10-30 months later (median follow up time 18 months). Altogether 30 patients were treated by lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy and 28 by anal dilatation. No serious complications were observed in either group. One recurrence was observed in the group treated by sphincterotomy, whereas eight occurred in the other group (p less than 0.05). Functional results with respect to impaired control of flatus and soiling of underwear were significantly better after sphincterotomy (p less than 0.002). It is concluded that lateral subcutaneous sphincterotomy is the treatment of choice for idiopathic chronic anal fissure resistant to conservative measures.
The extent of sphincter division by the subcutaneous or the open technique is examined by comparing the change in anal canal pressure after either method of sphincterotomy in twenty-eight patients with chronic anal fissure randomly allocated. In all patients the fissures healed at one month with significant reduction (P less than 0.01) of anal canal pressures to 52 (17-75) cmH2O after subcutaneous and 47.5 (35-100) cmH2O after open sphincterotomy, a 51 (22-77) and 50 (11-68) per cent reduction of their respective pre-operative measurements. Adequate sphincterotomy can be achieved by both techniques.
A prospective randomized trial has compared manual dilatation of the anus (MDA)during general anesthesia with lateral subcutaneous spincterotomy (LSS) during local anesthesia for the management of anal fissure in 156 patients. The two groups were similar with respect to age, sex and symptoms. There was no difference in the duration of time off work or early complications of treatment but, four months after operation, 93 per cent claimed to have been improved by MDA compared with 78 per cent after LSS (P less than 0.05). Recurrent fissure was recorded in 13 patients after LSS (29 per cent) compared with four (10 per cent) after MDA (P less than 0.02). There was a significant reduction in anal pressure at four months (P less than 0.02) after MDA, (123 +/- 31 to 97 +/-33) and LSS (127 +/- 36 to 104 +/- 32), but the anal pressure remained unchanged by operation in all patients where pressures were measured with recurrent fissure. These data indicate that MDA gives better results than LSS for treatment of anal fissure and that successful treatment is associated with a reduction in anal pressure.
BACKGROUND: New methods of rapid opiate detoxification, under intravenous sedation, can detoxify heroin-addicted patients in 24 hours. Their clinical application has been limited by the lack of studies establishing both efficacy and safety. METHOD: In a randomised, controlled study, 300 treatment-refractory, heroin-addicted patients received rapid intravenous detoxification treatment (naloxone infusion, 0.06-0.08 mg/kg, then oral naltrexone 50 mg/day) under either monitored light intravenous sedation or unmonitored deep intravenous sedation. RESULTS: All patients were successfully detoxified and 93% remained abstinent one month later. Severity of withdrawal, according to the Wang Scale modified by Loimer, was 4.9 (s.d. 3.0) points in the light sedation group and 4.8 (s.d. 2.9) in the deep sedation group (P = 0.26). Two patients (1.3%) in the light sedation group and four (2.6%) in the deep sedation group required tracheal intubation (P = 0.31). There was only one severe complication, a case of nosocomial aspirative pneumonia which improved with antibiotic treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Successful rapid intravenous detoxification can be achieved using relatively light levels of sedation.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: To compare the cholesterol-lowering efficacy and other metabolic effects of plant sterol and stanol esters, both of which are commonly used in the dietary management of hypercholesterolaemia. METHODS AND RESULTS: The cholesterol-lowering efficacy of equivalent intakes of sterol and stanol esters and of different intakes of stanol esters were compared at 1 and 2 months, both in normal subjects and treated patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Systemic effects were assessed by measuring serum levels of plant sterols and of lathosterol and 7alpha-hydroxy-cholestenone, indices of sterol absorption and of cholesterol and bile acid synthesis respectively. There were no significant differences during the study between 1.6g daily of sterol and stanol esters in reducing total cholesterol (by 3-7%) or low density lipoprotein cholesterol (by 4-8%), nor between 1.6 and 2.6 g daily of stanol. However, the cholesterol-lowering effect of plant sterol esters was attenuated between 1 and 2 months. This was accompanied by increased serum plant sterols and decreased levels of 7alpha-hydroxy-cholestenone, especially in statin-treated hypercholesterolaemic patients not taking bile acid sequestrants. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that absorption of dietary plant sterols suppressed bile acid synthesis, thereby diminishing their cholesterol-lowering efficacy. In contrast, plant stanols reduced plant sterol absorption and maintained their cholesterol-lowering efficacy.
The effects of a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet (LFD) or a higher-fat, higher-cholesterol diet (HFD) on plasma concentrations of lipids, lipoproteins, lathosterol (an index of cholesterol synthesis rate), and plant sterols were determined in 19 patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) treated with simvastatin. The study followed a randomized crossover design including two 8-week diet periods. The LFD significantly decreased plasma lathosterol (-22%), cholesterol (-6%), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (-6%), and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (-7%) levels compared with the HFD. Decreases in plasma lathosterol and LDL cholesterol concentrations in patients during the LFD were significantly correlated (r = .522, n = 19, P < .05). These results suggest that a LFD may enhance the decrease in cholesterol synthesis induced by simvastatin treatment, and in this way might contribute to the decrease in plasma cholesterol levels when the fat content of the diet is reduced in simvastatin-treated FH patients.
The effect of diet on plasma lipids and lipoproteins was examined in 19 patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia treated with the HMGCoA reductase inhibitor, simvastatin. The study was a randomized double-blind cross-over trial of two diets: a low fat diet and a higher fat diet, and was performed to determine whether ongoing attention to diet is necessary for patients receiving this drug for the treatment of familial hypercholesterolaemia. Plasma cholesterol concentration was 6.5 per cent lower on the low fat diet than on the high fat diet. The difference was within the range predicted by the Jacobs modification of the Keys formula from the reported intake on the two diets. The fall on the low fat diet was principally accounted for by a reduction in low density lipoprotein cholesterol, although high density lipoprotein cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1 also fell. Patients taking HMGCoA reductase inhibitors for the treatment of familial hypercholesterolaemia respond to changes in dietary fat intake. They are thus likely to achieve further reduction in their coronary heart disease risk, and should remain on a low saturated fat low cholesterol diet even when taking these powerful lipid lowering drugs.
In a prospective, randomized, controlled study an intravenous vitamin B complex and vitamin C preparation was administered pre- and post-operatively to 28 elderly patients with a fractured proximal femur and compared with 32 nonsupplemented postoperative controls. Vitamin supplementation significantly, though only transiently, improved postoperative thiamine status (P less than 0.001), but had no influence on mental state or outcome during the postsurgical period. Therefore, the use of parenteral vitamins for postoperative confusion cannot be justified on a routine basis.
A 10 day study of nitrogen and calorie balance has been undertaken in 61 women patients aged 65-96 years (mean age 81 years) with femoral neck fractures. All underwent fracture surgery with an inhalation anaesthetic lasting from 45 min to 2 h. Intake of ward food varied widely but was always low with a mean of 127 mg N kg-1 and 17 kcal kg-1 daily. Daily nitrogen production was 85-250 mg N kg-1 (mean 158 mg N kg-1) and calorie expenditure was 17-48 kcal kg-1 (mean 32 kcal kg-1). These were greatest in trochanteric fracture patients. Of the 61 patients, 90 per cent were in negative nitrogen balance with a mean 8 day deficit of 411 mg N kg-1 and all in negative calorie balance, mean 141 kcal kg-1. The deficits were greatest in trochanteric fracture patients. Sip feeding with supplementary enriched drinks raised protein and calorie intake substantially. Both nitrogen and calorie balance were significantly improved, but large calorie deficits remained; intolerance of the supplements proved to be a handicap in correcting the deficits in many patients.
A double-blind comparative study of 1 alpha-OHD3 and placebo was performed on 37 patients with osteoporotic hip fracture without clinical osteomalacia. 1 alpha-OHD3, in a dose of 1 microgram/day together with 2.5 g CaCO3, did not heal osteoporosis as judged from determinations of bone mineral density and histomorphometric analyses during four months of treatment. However, 1 alpha-OHD3 seemed to have an effect on fracture healing as concluded from the posttreatment alkaline phosphatase level. Hypercalcemia was common, occurring in six out of 19 patients treated with 1 alpha-OHD3. It is concluded that treatment of osteoporosis with 1 alpha-OHD3 and calcium is ineffective and potentially dangerous because it frequently causes hypercalcemia.
This multicentre, double-blind, randomised, crossover study compared the efficacy, safety and tolerability of subcutaneous sumatriptan (6 mg and 12 mg) with placebo in 134 in-patients with cluster headache. Headache improvement to mild or no pain at 5, 10 and 15 min after treatment was recorded. At 10 min, headache relief was reported by 25% (placebo), 49% (6 mg) and 63% (12 mg) of patients and at 15 min the results were 35% (placebo), 75% (6 mg) and 80% (12 mg) (p < 0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). The 12 mg dose was not significantly better than the 6 mg dose and was associated with more adverse events. The 6 mg dose is therefore recommended for the acute treatment of cluster headache.
In this multicentre, randomized, double-blind, single-dose study a total of 374 patients generally suffering from migraine attacks suitable for treatment with non-prescription drugs, received either oral acetylsalicylic acid effervescent 1000 mg (ASAE) or effervescent placebo for the treatment of an acute migraine attack. Of the 343 patients fulfilling the criteria for efficacy analysis 169 patients took acetylsalicylic acid and 174 placebo. Response rates (reduction of headache severity from severe or moderate to mild or no pain at 2 h after administration) were 55.0% for acetylsalicylic acid and 36.8% for placebo (P < 0.001). Twenty-nine percent of patients in the active treatment group were pain-free after 2 h compared with 16.7% in the placebo group (P = 0.007). No headache recurred within 24 h post-dose in 84.6% of patients in the active group and in 85.1% of patients in the placebo group. Effervescent placebo reduced nausea and vomiting to the same degree as the active drug. Adverse events of acetylsalicylic acid (8.3%) were generally mild or moderate and comparable to those of placebo (2.9%). This study shows that oral ASAE is safe and effective for the treatment of acute migraine attacks.
The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerance of a single dose of the acetaminophen 400 mg-codeine 25 mg combination (ACC) aspirin 1000 mg (A) and a placebo (P) for the treatment of acute migraine attack. The study design was randomized, multicentre, double-blind and double dummy with cross-over on three periods. Of the 198 patients who had three attacks 29.8%, 52.3% and 49.7% had recorded the complete or almost complete disappearance of the pain at 2 h after P, A and ACC respectively. When compared with the placebo, the difference was significant for the A and ACC. When complete disappearance of pain at 2 h was used as a criterion, no significant difference was observed. These results enabled the sensitivity of the evaluation criteria suggested for clinical trials of migraine attack to be discussed.
Effect of continuous passive motion (CPM) protocols on outcomes after total knee arthroplasty. In this prospective randomized controlled study, 147 patients were assigned to 1 of 3 treatment groups: CPM from 0 degrees to 40 degrees and increased by 10 degrees per day, CPM from 90 degrees to 50 degrees (early flexion) and gradually progressed into full extension over a 3-day period, and a no-CPM group. The CPM was administered twice a day for 3 hours over a 5-day period. All patients participated in the same postoperative physiotherapy program. Patients were assessed preoperatively, day 5, 3 months, and 1 year postoperatively. The early flexion group had significantly more range of flexion than both the standard and control groups at day 5. There was no significant difference between the groups for any other variable tested at any time frame. Key words: total knee arthroplasty, CPM, rehabilitation, outcomes.
Twenty-two primary total knee arthroplasties were prospectively randomized into one of two treatment protocols. Ten of these patients were managed in the hospital after surgery by means of a postoperative splint. The remaining 12 patients were placed immediately postoperatively in the recovery room into the continuous passive motion (CPM) device. The study compares the range of motion, analgesic use, hospital stay, and the volume of hemovac output in the two groups. These cases demonstrated two statistically significant findings with the use of CPM: (1) decreased use of narcotic analgesics and (2) decreased length of hospital stay.
To determine the justification of a continuous passive motion machine in the treatment of postoperative total knee arthroplasties, a comparative study of 50 consecutive patients with simultaneous bilateral total knee arthroplasties was undertaken. The patients served as their own controls because one randomly selected knee was placed in the machine while the remaining knee was treated with physical therapy only. There was no significant difference in the range of motion during the eight days of hospitalization or the follow-up visits at two weeks, two months, six months, and one year. There was a significant decrease in the swelling about the knee. The continuous passive motion treated knees appeared to be generally weaker as revealed by more extensor lags and flexor tightness at discharge from the hospital. Also, increased costs incurred from the need for additional equipment and increased staff time made the machine neither cost-effective nor beneficial.
Sixty-two patients undergoing primary total knee arthroplasty were studied prospectively. There were 42 patients in whom continuous passive motion (CPM) was used after surgery and 20 controls. The two groups were comparable with respect to age, diagnosis, sex, weight, and preoperative deformity and motion. The mean length of time required for CPM patients to achieve 90 degrees of flexion (9.1 days) was shorter than that for the control group (13.8 days). At the time of discharge from the hospital, however, there was no significant difference between the groups in amount of either flexion or extension. All patients had venograms performed after arthroplasty; the incidence of positive studies indicating thrombophlebitis was 45% in CPM patients and 75% in controls. These data demonstrate that CPM after knee arthroplasty enables patients to recover motion more quickly and affords some protection against deep vein thrombosis.
A total of 71 patients with advanced gastric carcinoma were randomized to receive either folinic acid + fluorouracil (arm A) or the same combination with the addition of 4-epidoxorubicin (arm B). Of the 62 evaluable patients (31 in both arms), six patients achieved a CR (10%) and 16 a PR (25.5%) with an overall response rate of 35.5% (29% in arm A and 42% in arm B; p = .28). Median duration of response was 6 and 7 months for arm A and B, respectively (p = .6). Responder patients showed a significantly better median survival duration than nonresponders (p = .01); in arm B the median survival duration was 16 months for responder patients in contrast to 7 months for nonresponders (p = .004). Toxicity was mild without significant differences between the two groups. There was one death due to hematological toxicity (arm A). The EPI-FA-FU combination appears effective and well tolerated with the additional advantage of being able to be administered in the outpatient clinic.
Forty-eight patients with unresectable gastric cancer were enrolled for a randomized trial of FP (n = 24) vs FEP (n = 24) combination chemotherapy with respect to their effects on survival period. Of these, excluding 7 patients, 21 in FP group were treated with 400 mg/m2 UFT po daily and 50 mg/m2 CDDP i.v. on days 1 and 8 every 4 weeks, and 20 in FEP group were treated with 400 mg/m2 UFT po daily, 50 mg/m2 etoposide iv and 50 mg/m2 CDDP i.v. on days 1 and 8 every 4 weeks. In FP group, 10 PR in primary lesions were observed with an overall response rate of 52.4%. In FEP group, 5 PR in primary lesions were observed with an overall response rate of 35.0%. Toxicities over Grade 3 were anorexia (35%), vomiting (25%), and leukopenia (12%), which were manageable. The 50% survival time in FP and FEP group was 233 and 176 days, respectively. Because of the high response rate and prolongation of the survival period, combination chemotherapy with FP seemed to be useful for the treatment of patients with advanced gastric cancer.
From January, 1985, through January, 1987, 165 patients with advanced gastric cancer were randomized to receive epirubicin (E) alone (90 mg/m2 day 1), 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) alone (500 mg/m2 days 1-5), or the combination of E (90 mg/m2 day 1) and 5-FU (400 mg/m2 days 1-5). Courses were repeated every four weeks. Patients were stratified by extent (locally advanced vs. metastatic), evaluability (measurable vs. nonmeasurable) and by history of prior radiotherapy (yes vs. no). Randomization to single arm epirubicin was stopped after 26 patients were enrolled. Objective responses occurred in only 1/16 (6%) of the patients treated with E alone, 1/40 (5%) with 5-FU alone and 4/33 (12%) with both 5-FU and E. There were no significant differences in all eligible patients with respect to time to progression or overall survival in the three treatment arms. Toxicity was primarily hematologic and more pronounced in the combination arm. Neither 5-FU alone, epirubicin alone, or the combination have a major impact in the treatment of gastric carcinoma.
Eighty-two evaluable patients with advanced gastric carcinoma were randomized to receive either 5-FU alone or the combination of carmustine, doxorubicin, 5-FU, and mitomycin (BAFMi). Objective remissions were seen in 15% of the patients who received 5-FU alone and in 22% of the patients on the BAFMi regimen. The difference was not statistically significant. The median duration of objective remission (31 vs 40 weeks) was longer using BAFMi combination, and the median duration of survival, calculated in the 85 randomized patients, was slightly longer using 5-FU (28 vs 24 weeks). The differences were not statistically significant. It is concluded that there is no therapeutic advantage in using the BAFMi combination over 5-FU alone.
A randomised cross-over study of 3 bladder washout treatments--saline, Suby G and Solution R--was conducted on 25 elderly females with long-term catheters in order to examine crystal formation and catheter encrustation. With 2 exceptions, all patients produced crystals; only 14 completed the study. While a significant reduction in struvite crystals was found in the returned acidic washout fluid, there was no significant reduction of crystals in the neutral (saline) washout following any of the 3-week periods of treatment. Uric acid crystals appeared with Suby G and Solution R and these solutions were associated with higher red cell deposits in the urine. There was no significant difference in catheter encrustation between the various washouts.
Urinary incontinence is often managed with a long-term urethral catheter after other methods have failed. Such urethral catheterization is associated with polymicrobial bacteriuria, catheter obstruction, fever, bacteremia, urinary tract stones, and death. Periodic catheter irrigation is a common but untested management procedure intended to prevent catheter obstruction, fevers, and/or bacteremia. To evaluate this technique, we performed a randomized crossover trial comparing ten weeks of once-daily normal saline irrigation with ten weeks of no irrigation in 32 long-term catheterized women. The incidence of catheter obstructions and febrile episodes and the prevalence and species of bacteriuria were similar whether examined as completed crossover patients (N = 23) or as partially completed trials (N = 9). Once-daily irrigation with normal saline of long-term urethral catheters is a time-consuming and costly procedure that is unlikely to have an impact on the morbidity associated with such catheters.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify the dose for a contraceptive patch that provides a predetermined level of ovulation suppression and cycle control and that is well tolerated. STUDY DESIGN: In this randomized study, 610 subjects received 10-, 15-, or 20-cm(2) patch dose sizes (20-cm(2), Ortho Evra/Evra) (Janssen Pharmaceutica, NV Belgium) or Ortho-Cyclen/Cilest (Janssen Pharmaceutica, NV Belgium) for up to 4 cycles. As with Ortho-Cyclen, patch regimens included 21 dosing days (3 consecutive 7-day patches) followed by 1 dose-free week. RESULTS: The patch regimens demonstrated a dose-response for ovulation suppression and cycle control. Presumed ovulation, determined on the basis of serum progesterone concentrations > or = 3 ng/mL in cycles 1 and 3, occurred in 6.2% (Ortho Evra) and 7.2% (Ortho-Cyclen) of subjects. At cycle 3, breakthrough bleeding/spotting was reported by 10.5% and 15.0% of subjects, respectively. Compliance with each patch was superior to that with Ortho-Cyclen (all P <.001). All regimens had safety profiles typical of oral contraceptives. CONCLUSION: The 20-cm(2) patch (Ortho Evra) provided ovulation suppression, cycle control, and safety similar to that of Ortho-Cyclen, with significantly better compliance.
A randomized prospective control trial for determining the efficacy of antithrombin III concentrates in hepatic resection was performed using 24 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Thirteen patients were given antithrombin III concentrates (1,500 IU) immediately before operation, during hepatectomy and immediately after operation. Coagulant and fibrinolytic profiles were determined by molecular markers such as thrombin-antithrombin III complex and plasmin-alpha 2plasmin inhibitor complex. During hepatic resection, both hypercoagulability and mainly primary hyperfibrinolysis occurred. Regarding the effectiveness of antithrombin III concentrates, in the antithrombin III treatment group, only a significant lower incidence of positive soluble fibrin monomer complex at postoperative days 1 and 5 was found among all the parameters studied. Therefore, no definite evidence of clinical usefulness of the perioperative administration of antithrombin III concentrates in hepatic resection was proved.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether reduction of radial head subluxation (RHS) is more successful using pronation and flexion (PF) vs the more widely used supination and flexion (SF) method. METHODS: Prospective study in a tertiary care children's hospital ED from August 1996 through December 1997. Inclusion criteria included age <7 years with an upper-extremity injury. Exclusion criteria included neurologic impairment, congenital malformation, or obvious bony deformity or edema. Patients were randomized to receive either PF or SF. Reduction was considered successful if the child used the injured arm. Both the physician and the parent rated the child's pain during the procedure using a descriptive ordinal scale, from 0 (no pain) to 3 (severe pain). RESULTS: 148 patients were enrolled; 13 were excluded. Success was achieved on the first attempt in 53/67 (80%, 95% CI = 0.67 to 0.88) of patients receiving PF and in 47/68 (69%, 95% CI = 0.57 to 0.80) of those receiving SF (p = 0.186). For those injuring the left arm, 29/41 (71%, 95% CI = 0.54 to 0.84) were successfully reduced using SF, while 33/37 (89%, 95% CI = 0.75 to 0.97) were successfully reduced using PF (p = 0.044). Physicians perceived PF to be less painful than SF (p = 0.013). There was no significant pain score difference rated by parents. CONCLUSIONS: Both PF and SF can be used with success to reduce RHS. For left arm injuries, PF should be attempted first, since it may decrease the need for further treatment. PF may be less painful, particularly for first reduction attempts.
We conducted an economic evaluation in a UK setting based on a 12-week prospective randomized open-label parallel-group comparison of eformoterol Turbohaler 12 microg b. i.d. with salmeterol Accuhaler 50 microg b. i.d. in children aged 6-17 with symptomatic asthma receiving inhaled corticosteroids and short-acting beta2-agonists. The principal effectiveness measure was percentage of symptom-free days with no short-acting beta2-agonist use during the study period. Asthma-related medication, unscheduled physician contacts and hospitalizations were collected prospectively and cost to the UK NHS calculated using year 2,000 prices. The economic evaluation included 73 patients in the eformoterol group and 72 patients in the salmeterol group. The mean age of patients was 11.6 years (eformoterol) and 11.8 years (salmeterol). The mean percentage of symptom-free days with no short-acting beta2-agonist use was 39% in the eformoterol group and 30% in the salmeterol group. Mean per patient daily cost was 1.15 pounds in the eformoterol group and 1.39 pounds in the salmeterol group. Both cost and effectiveness differences favoured eformoterol (P < 0.05; one-sided). Sensitivity analysis confirmed the results to be robust to changes in effectiveness, price and resource utilisation parameters. Eformoterol delivered by Turbohaler was found to be significantly more effective and less expensive than salmeterol Accuhaler in this study.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the relative economic consequences of treating asthmatics with twice daily dry powder formoterol 12 micrograms as compared with salmeterol 50 micrograms from a societal perspective. DESIGN AND SETTING: A randomised, 6-month, open-label study including 482 patients with asthma was conducted in Italy, Spain, France, Switzerland, the UK and Sweden. Medical costs included the costs of medications, physician services, emergency room visits, hospital admissions and lung function and other tests. Travel costs and costs of production loss were also calculated. Unit prices were estimated from external sources. To pool the costs of the 6 countries, European currencies were converted to US dollars using 1995 exchange rates. Outcome measures were the number of episode-free days (EFDs) and the number of patients reaching a clinically relevant improvement in quality of life as measured using the St. Georges Respiratory Questionnaire. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES AND RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the 2 treatment arms in the frequency of emergency room visits, hospital admissions, use of rescue medication or contacts with general practitioners (GPs), specialists or nurses. Median medical costs over 6 months were $US828 per patient with formoterol and $US850 with salmeterol. This difference was not statistically significant. In both groups, about 60% of all days were episode-free. Average costs per EFD were about $US9 for both treatments. The average cost per patient reaching a clinically relevant improvement in quality of life was between $US1300 and $US1400. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios were not calculated because both costs and outcomes were not significantly different. Asthma-related absenteeism ranged between 3 days and 6 months per patient in both groups. CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence to suggest that either treatment was more cost effective than the other.
We have investigated a claim that bladder filling, by straightening an anteverted uterus into line with the vagina, might facilitate embryo transfer through the cervix after in vitro fertilization. In a randomized controlled trail in 66 women with and 76 without a filled bladder, we found no significant differences in difficulties encountered at embryo transfer or in the chance of pregnancy.
The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy and side effects of two different misoprostol regimens for second-trimester pregnancy termination. Sixty women in second trimester of gestation with indications for pregnancy termination were randomly assigned in two equal groups to receive either vaginal or oral misoprostol. The dosing regimen was 400 microg as the initial dose followed by 400 microg up to 3 doses (1200 microg) if needed in each group. Efficacy and side effects were compared. The percentage of women who delivered was significantly higher in vaginal group than the oral group (86.7 vs. 43.3 p = 0.0006). No significant differences in complication rates and induction to delivery interval were noted between the two groups. Vaginal administration of misoprostol resulted in a higher success rate for second trimester pregnancy termination, whereas, no significant differences in induction to delivery time and complication rates were noted between vaginal and oral groups.
Extra-amniotic prostaglandin F2alpha (PG F2alpha) is probably the most widely used medical method for mid-trimester termination of pregnancy. The method is highly effective but is financially costly, particularly for poor countries faced with restricted health budgets. The aim of this study was to establish whether misoprostol administered vaginally is as effective as PG F2alpha. Sixty-one patients were prospectively randomized to receive either misoprostol (n=30) vaginally, or PG F2alpha (n=31) extra-amniotically. The overall success rate was 83.6%. The success rates in the misoprostol and PG F2alpha groups were 83.3% and 83.8% respectively. There was no statistical difference in the groups in relation to side effects. In this carefully selected group of patients, misoprostol was as safe and effective as PG F2alpha in mid-trimester termination of pregnancy. In these days of financial constraints, misoprostol is the preferred method for mid-trimester termination of pregnancy.
OBJECTIVE: This objective of this study was to investigate the recruitment rate for a clinical treatment trial for adolescents with bulimia nervosa. METHOD: Recruitment rates for a 5-year randomized controlled trial for adolescent bulimia nervosa were analyzed. RESULTS: Although the rate of randomization fluctuated over the course of the study, the overall rate of participants recruited was fairly consistent. The number of participants who were assessed for the study but who did not qualify, and the number of participants who qualified for the study but who chose not to join, were also consistent. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that it is feasible to recruit adolescents for a bulimia nervosa treatment trial. A better understanding of the reasons behind a participant's decision to stay in a treatment study versus discontinue a treatment study, as well as differences between adult and adolescent patients, could aid in the design of future treatment studies.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluate the effectiveness of the family meal intervention (FMI) on weight gain. METHOD: Upon admission 12 adolescents diagnosed with anorexia nervosa were randomly assigned to two groups of outpatient family - based therapy, treated during 6 months, and followed-up at 12 months. Measures were administered at each of these instances. Groups differed only with regard to the FMI. RESULTS: Both treatments produced considerable and comparable improvement in biological parameters, in depression, and in eating and general psychological symptoms. DISCUSSION: Although the FMI did not appear to have a significant effect on weight gain, results suggest it might have a differential benefit for the intractable self-starving patient with greater psychopathology. The finding that weight recovery was not associated to general psychological outcome in those patients with more psychiatric co - morbidity, suggests caution when prioritizing clinical goals.
Ninety subjects with DSM-III-R anorexia nervosa were randomly allocated to four treatment options, one inpatient, two outpatient, and one comprising an assessment interview only. Twenty were thus offered a package of outpatient individual and family psychotherapy. At 2-year follow-up, 12 of the 20 were classed as well, or very nearly well, according to operationally defined criteria. Statistically significant improvements over time were obtained for weight, mean body mass index (BMI), and also for psychological, sexual, and socioeconomic adjustments. Weight and BMI changes were significantly better than for the assessment only group, some of whom had received extensive treatment elsewhere. The style of the outpatient therapy and compliance with it are described in some detail and prognostic indicators for the treated and untreated groups presented. Lower weights at presentation and vomiting were associated with poorer outcome, although age and length of history were not.
Ninety patients with severe anorexia nervosa fulfilling DSM-III-R criteria were assessed in depth in terms of their family developmental psychopathology and then randomly allocated to either one of three treatment groups or to no treatment. In three treatment regimes, a behavioural approach to diet and weight gain was coupled with individual and family psychotherapy directed at the adolescent maturational problems. All three treatment regimes were highly significantly effective at one year in terms of weight gain, return of menstruation, and aspects of social and sexual adjustment. Body weights above those at pubertal onset were achieved for the group mean maximum and one-year follow-up weights for all three treatment groups but not the control group.
Thirty out-patients with severe anorexia nervosa were randomly allocated to either 12 sessions of dietary advice or 12 sessions of combined individual and family psychotherapy. At one-year follow-up both groups showed significant overall improvement, and the dietary advice group showed significant weight gain. A similar mean weight gain for the psychotherapy patients did not reach statistical significance, but this group made significant improvements in sexual and social adjustment.
BACKGROUND: An efficient humidification system is expected to maintain fluid and easily drainable airway secretions. This study aims to compare the efficiency and safety of three humidification systems during prolonged mechanical ventilation. DESIGN: Two-center, prospective, randomized study. METHODS: 45 critically ill patients undergoing mechanical ventilation were included in the study and allocated to receive one of three humidification techniques: 1) Bennett Cascade water-bath humidifier (Bennett group); 2) Fisher & Paykel servocontrolled humidifier (F & P group); 3) HME Hygrobac DAR (HME group). Clinical and experimental observations were conducted for 3 to 7 consecutive days and included: body T degree, room T degree, inspired gas T degree, tracheal T degree, relative and absolute humidity, heat and water loss, airway secretion score, need for endotracheal saline instillation and incidence of ETT occlusion. RESULTS: The HME group showed a lower temperature of inspired gases compared to the F & P group (p < 0.05); it also showed a lower absolute humidity compared to both Bennett and F & P groups (p < 0.05). A better airway secretion score was obtained in Bennett and F & P groups compared to the HME group (p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Passive humidification systems provided low degrees of humidity and temperature and could not maintain good secretions. Active systems appeared to satisfy the recommended standards and to allow fluid and easily drainable secretions.
Heat and moisture exchangers (HME) are increasingly used to warm and humidify inspired gases in intubated ventilated patients. But these devices add dead space that may alter the alveolar ventilation. This could impair the efficiency of spontaneous ventilation (SV) during weaning trials from mechanical ventilation. Fifteen patients were tested with an HME (Hygrobac-DAR) and a heated humidifier (HH) (Fischer-Paykel MR 450) in a random order during weaning trials in SV with inspiratory pressure support. Minute ventilation VE, tidal volume), and respiratory rate were recorded and arterial blood was sampled for blood gas analysis with each device. The HME gave a significantly greater VE than the HH (9.3 +/- 0.8 L/min vs 8.1 +/- 0.8 L/min; p < 0.005), because of increased respiratory rate (21 +/- 2/min vs 19 +/- 2/min; p < 0.05). Tidal volume was unchanged for HME and HH (470 +/- 32 mL vs 458 +/- 39 mL). The higher PaCO2 with HME than with HH (44 +/- 2 mm Hg vs 42 +/- 2 mm Hg; p < 0.005) revealed an insufficient alveolar ventilation response to the increase in dead space. Arterial Po2 rose with the HME, but not significantly above the HH values (103 +/- 6 mm Hg vs 97 +/- 6 mm Hg; p = 0.055), possibly because of a positive end-expiratory pressure effect of the HME. The need to increase VE in SV when an HME is used should be taken into account during difficult weaning from mechanical ventilation.
Inspired gases must be warmed and humidified during mechanical ventilation. In a prospective randomized study we compared the performance of a heated humidifier (HH) (Draegger Aquaport) and a heat and moisture exchanger (HME) (Pall Filter BB 2215). A total of 116 patients requiring mechanical ventilation (Servo 900 C Siemens) were enrolled into the study and were randomly assigned to 2 groups. Patients in group I were ventilated with a traditional breathing circuit with HH and patients in group II using a simplified circuit with HME. Pre-existing and hospital acquired atelectasis and pneumonia, occurrence of endotracheal tube (ET) occlusion and ventilatory parameters (respiratory rate, tidal volume) were studied. No statistical difference was found between groups for each parameter except the greater frequency of ET occlusions in the II group (0/61 vs 9/55) (p = 0.0008). Pall Filter (PF), a hydrophobic filter, humidifies the dry gases from the condensed water which is put down on the HME surfaces during cooling of saturated expired gases. This purely physical property is linked to the magnitude of the thermic gradient between the expired gases and the ambiant temperature. Performance impairment of PF in our study might be due to high ambiant temperature in the intensive care unit (usually around 28 degrees C) which reduces thermic gradient and water exchanges. We conclude that efficiency of PF may be weak in some conditions of ambiant temperature.
Adequate humidification of inspired gases with HMEs during long-term MV remains controversial. In this study, a comparison is made between tracheal secretions during long-term MV either with HME or conventional HH. Both the HME and HH groups were similar with respect to age, sex, diagnosis, duration of MV, SAPS and mortality. Temperature of gases in the tracheal tube was lower and the amount of tracheal instillations was greater in the HME group than in the HH group. Tracheal secretions became thicker between day 1 (control) and day 5, in the HME group than in the HH group. Four and two tube occlusions occurred in HME and HH groups, respectively. Tracheal bacterial colonization was similar in the two groups. Given the advantages of HME (reduced nurses' work and financial cost), HME could be routinely used under cautious surveillance and replaced by HH if difficulty in suctioning occurs.
The effect of a heat and moisture exchanger on intra-operative aural canal (core) and mean skin temperatures was investigated in elderly patients who had elective total hip arthroplasty under general anaesthesia with artificial ventilation of the lungs. Group 1 (n = 20) did not receive any form of artificial humidification while in group 2 (n = 20) a heat and moisture exchanger was inserted in the breathing system and in group 3 (n = 20) the inspired gases were humidified and warmed at 40 degrees C by means of a heated humidifier. Time of surgery, intravenous fluid administration and operating theatre temperature were standardised. Mean (SD) aural canal (core) temperature decreased significantly in groups 1 and 2 (p less than 0.001), while there was a fall of 0.3 degrees C (0.6) in group 3, which was not significant. Mean skin temperature decreased during anaesthesia and surgery in both groups 1 and 2 (p less than 0.05), while it increased in group 3. There was a significantly greater loss of body heat in groups 1 and 2 compared with group 3 intra-operatively (p less than 0.001). We conclude tha a heat and moisture exchanger did not prevent the decrease in intra-operative body temperature in elderly patients.
The influence of heated humidification on body temperature and postoperative shivering was studied in 30 patients undergoing major intra-abdominal surgery. In the control group (I) the anaesthetic gases, administered in a non-rebreathing system, were humidified by a sponge heat and moisture exchanger. In group II the gases were humidified and heated to 37 degrees C and in group III up to 40 degrees C. Anaesthesia, surface insulation and warming of the infusions were standardized. The temperature was registered at the lower oesophagus and the big toe. Shivering and the feeling of cold were estimated at 15 min intervals postoperatively. A good correlation was found between heat gain during the first hour of recovery, the feeling of cold and intensity of shivering. Intraoperative heat loss was minimal in all groups. Heated humidification had no statistically significant effect on the body temperatures or postoperative shivering and thus provided no additional advantage compared to the control group.
Hygroscopic condensor humidifiers (HCH) are reportedly capable of humidifying even the driest of ventilator source gases with at least 30 mg H2O/liter of ventilation. To assess the adequacy of the HCH during mechanical ventilation, we studied 26 patients over a 72-hour period (alternating 24-hour periods of humidification by a conventional cascade and the HCH). In these patients, we found no significant difference in static lung compliance, airway resistance, PaO2, and PaCO2 on either system. Additionally, estimates of sputum volume (over a four-hour collection period) and clearance of aerosolized 99mTc labelled DTPA (in five of these patients) also showed no significant differences between the two systems. We conclude that the HCH is capable of supplying necessary heat and moisture to most mechanically-ventilated patients for at least a period of 24 hours.
The frequency of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) varies between different clinical treatment settings and remains unknown for patients treated with unfractionated (UFH) or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) because of deep vein thrombosis. In this multicentre, open-label study, 1137 patients with deep vein thrombosis were randomly assigned to UFH for 5-7 d, reviparin, a LMWH, for 5-7 d (short-treated group) or reviparin for 28 d (long-treated group). Heparin-platelet factor 4 antibodies (HPF4-A) were determined on d 5-7 and d 21. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was defined by clinical evaluation. Two patients in the UFH group (incidence: 0.53%, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.06-1.91) and two patients in the long-treated LMWH group (incidence: 0.53%, 95% CI: 0.06-1.92) had HIT, while no HIT was observed in the short-treated LMWH group. Pulmonary embolism developed in one of the HIT-patients, who had HPF4-A and was treated with UFH. On d 5-7 the incidence of HPF4-A was 9.1% in the UFH group, 2.8% in the short-treated LMWH group and 3.7% in the long-treated LMWH group, with a significant increase to 20.7% in the UFH group and to 7.5% in the long-treated LMWH group on d 21. Therefore the incidence of HPF4-A and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was lower in patients treated with LMWH compared with UFH for the same duration of treatment.
The influence of antithrombin III (ATIII) level and ATIII activity, measured during intravenous heparin treatment for venous thromboembolism (VTE), on 'heparin requirement' (the heparin dose required to prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) into its designated therapeutic range), and on the likelihood of recurrent VTE during the first month of anticoagulant therapy, were examined in a prospective study of 232 patients with VTE treated according to a standard protocol. 15 patients with recurrent VTE (6.5%) had a lower mean APTT during heparin treatment than patients without recurrence; a finding due partly to their heparin requirement. However, there was no measurable relationship between ATIII level or ATIII activity and either heparin requirement or recurrence of VTE. By contrast, both the presence of disseminated malignancy and the development of heparin induced thrombocytopenia were powerful, clinically recognisable, risk factors for recurrence during or soon after heparin therapy.
Above-knee graduated compression stockings are effective in preventing postoperative deep vein thrombosis, but are more expensive and less acceptable than below-knee stockings. One hundred and fourteen patients undergoing major abdominal surgery were randomly allocated to wear above-knee or below-knee graduated compression stockings. Deep vein thromboses were diagnosed by isotope uptake in three of 56 patients (5.4 per cent) in the above-knee group and one of 58 patients (1.7 per cent) in the below-knee group. These differences are not statistically significant. Results suggest that below-knee stockings are as effective as above-knee in the prevention of postoperative deep vein thrombosis.
The prophylactic effect of low-dose heparin on postoperative fatal and on clinically apparent but non-fatal thromboembolic complications was studied in a double-blind, prospective, randomised study comprising 1296 patients. 16 out of 653 patients in the placebo group had such complications within the treatment period of 1 week, compared with 4 out of 643 in the heparin group. This difference was statistically significant (P less than 0.05). 4 cases in the placebo group and 1 in the heparin group were fatal. After prophylactic treatment had been stopped at the end of the first postoperative week, the rate of thromboembolic complications was equal for the 2 groups. Low-dose heparin prophylaxis is thus effective and should be given routinely in patients aged over 40 years; it should also be given for more than 1 week in patients not ambulant by then.
Participating in the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) IMPACT collaborative has given St. John's Hospital the opportunity to improve patient flow and the delivery of patient care. This partnership has allowed us to experience a wealth of information shared by a collaborative network of hospitals. IHI has introduced rapid-cycle improvement methodologies, variability-reduction strategies, and strategies to aid in planning for the expected as methods that have enhanced our already established performance-improvement program. St John's has achieved breakthrough improvement with patient flow.
Two individual teams, one from a small, rural clinic and one from a larger urban health system, were able to introduce innovations in care and realize improvement in patient outcomes.
St. John's Regional Health Center (SJRHC) is participating in the Institute for Healthcare Improvement's (IHI) IMPACT collaborative, a new IMProvement ACTion network of health care organizations that have joined together to improve patient care. By utilizing the network for sharing ideas, continuous quality improvement tools and support staff and physician involvement, we have achieved three important breakthrough improvements in patient flow in the hospital setting. The areas highlighted in this article are Perioperative Services, Emergency Department Admission, and Transfers to Cardiac Intensive Care Units.
Most people in developed countries will live with a serious, eventually fatal, chronic condition for months or years before dying; yet, the delivery of health care services has only just recently begun adapting to this reality. Quality improvement methods have been effective in helping clinical services to make substantial changes quickly. Quality improvement requires stating an aim, measuring success, and testing possible improvements. The testing of changes requires a clinical team to Plan, Do, Study, and Act on new insights (the "PDSA cycle"). Repeated PDSA cycles generate deep understanding of complex systems and make sustainable improvements rapidly. This paper discusses a composite case study in a nursing home setting, which builds on experience with multisite collaborative efforts and introduces quality improvement methods in the context of end-of-life care.
The Alaska Native Medical Center, one of nine teams that participated in the Institute for Health Care Improvement's Community-Wide Learning Collaborative, used quality improvement principles to address a disparately high post-neonatal infant mortality in the Anchorage Native infant population. A unique concept, "Days Between Deaths," was used to measure mortality change for a small data set. Ongoing evaluation processes have demonstrated a fifty percent reduction in infant mortality and very successful approaches to care for high social risk women and their families.
This study describes an Australian emergency department's (ED) experience with a quality improvement methodology from the USA. The Institute for Health Care Improvement (IHI) conducts collaboratives between clinical groups with similar interests, in this case ED. Their quality improvement model is described. Our involvement with the IHI showed the model to be transferable outside the USA. In applying the model to operational and clinical projects we were successful in meeting our goals to reduce clinical times: for time to analgesia (P= 0.34), time to thrombolysis (P= 0.30) and time to antibiotics in neutropenic patients (P= 0.015). We were unable to reach statistical significance in improvements due to the small sample sizes and sampling techniques. Changes in operational times were not clinically significant but almost reached statistical significance (e.g. median total length of stay in the ED fell 4 min (P= 0.06)). The near statistical significance of a small change was due to the large numbers of patients sampled.
BACKGROUND: Health care has shifted its focus regarding dying patients toward improving care rather than striving for cure. METHODS: The Center to Improve Care of the Dying and the Institute for Healthcare Improvement sponsored a quality improvement collaborative from July 1997 through July 1998 to learn how to accomplish this. RESULTS: (1) Classifying persons as "dying" or "not dying" does not help to ensure quality care at the end of life. The impossibility of predicting time of death in many illnesses demands not only a shift to asking whether a patient is sick enough to die of the current illness, but also targeting special services to those patients. (2) Quality improvement strategies in this arena regularly yield important gains in such fields as pain control, bereavement support, and advance planning. (3) Serious reform probably must originate in system design and routine practice rather than in exhortations to customize decision making. The Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences in Outcomes and Risks of Treatment (SUPPORT) found that 80% of the substantial variation in the rate of death at home correlated with hospital bed supply. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the inadequacy of the current classification system and on the unpredictability of the timing of death, a conceptual model is proposed for many patients that mixes conventional "aggressive" care with palliative care and is triggered by illness severity rather than by prognosis. High leverage reform in end-of-life care is available now through quality improvement strategies.
Multidisciplinary teams are different from the traditional team format in that representation and participation from various disciplines characterize the structure. In April 1996, a multidisciplinary group from Muhlenberg Regional Medical Center's intensive care unit learned methodology at the Institute for Health Care Improvement (IHI) Breakthrough Series in Adult Intensive Care. With the format learned, improvements in diverse areas such as ventilator management, intermediate care, clinical laboratory utilization, and others were accomplished. Continued support from an expert staff and utilization of on-line communication tools characterized this 15-month quality improvement endeavor. The end of the breakthrough series spurred the development of a hospital-wide collaborative cost containment team.
This article describes the use of rapid cycle improvement in a community hospital adult cardiac surgery program. The hospital participated in the Breakthrough Series: collaborative adult cardiac surgery sponsored by the Institute of Healthcare Improvement (IHI). As a result of this 1-year project, median length of stay for diagnosis-related groups 104 throug 108 was decreased 30 percent from 8.62 days to 6.0 days; percentage of patients extubated within 6 hours postoperatively rose from 5 percent to 75 percent; median cost per case declined $19 percent; and pain and anxiety, service, and satisfaction scores all improved. There was no adverse impact on the clinical indicators 30-day readmission rate, reintubation, return to operating room, and mortality.
PURPOSE: To explore how nurses experience and respond to patients' requests for assistance in dying (AID). DESIGN AND METHODS: A phenomenological study of 10 self-selected nurses. FINDINGS: Four major themes: Being Open to Hear and Hearing; Interpreting and Responding to the Meaning; Responding to Persistent Requests for AID, and Reflections. When faced with persistent requests for AID, participants provided a continuum of interventions: refusal, providing palliative care that might secondarily hasten dying, respecting and not interfering with patients' or families' plans to hasten dying, and providing varying types and degrees of direct AID. Their responses were context-driven rather than rule-mandated, and they drew a distinction between secondarily hastening and directly causing death. CONCLUSIONS: Few nurses in this study unequivocally agreed or refused to directly help a patient die. Most struggled alone and in silence to find a morally and legally acceptable way to help patients who persisted in requesting AID. Regardless of how they responded, many described feelings of conflict, guilt, and moral distress.
Although euthanasia has been a pressing ethical and public issue, empirical data are lacking in Japan. We aimed to explore Japanese nurses' attitudes to patients' requests for euthanasia and to estimate the proportion of nurses who have taken active steps to hasten death. A postal survey was conducted between October and December 1999 among all nurse members of the Japanese Association of Palliative Medicine, using a self-administered questionnaire based on the one used in a previous survey with Australian nurses in 1991. The response rate was 68%. A total of 53% of the respondents had been asked by patients to hasten their death, but none had taken active steps to bring about death. Only 23% regarded voluntary active euthanasia as something ethically right and 14% would practice it if it were legal. A comparison with empirical data from the previous Australian study suggests a significantly more conservative attitude among Japanese nurses.
PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To describe nurses' views of care of the terminally ill. DESIGN: Descriptive cross-sectional survey. SAMPLE: 300 nurses who completed a survey published in Nursing98 and Nursing Management and 2,033 nurses randomly selected from the Oncology Nursing Society (N = 2,333). METHODS: Mailed end-of-life (EOL) care survey. MAIN RESEARCH VARIABLES: Dilemmas, barriers, and effectiveness of EOL care and education and attitudes regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia. FINDINGS: EOL care dilemmas are common in nursing practice, and many barriers exist to providing quality EOL care. Issues of euthanasia and assisted suicide are particularly significant to nurses who struggle to provide pain and symptom relief amid a system characterized by deficiencies in EOL care. CONCLUSIONS: Improved care is contingent on adequate education of nurses as the primary caregivers of patients and families who are facing the end of life. Study findings provide direction for improved care of the terminally ill. IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING PRACTICE: Oncology nurses are centrally involved in care of the terminally ill. Major reform is needed to provide quality EOL care.
What role do nurses play in euthanasia? How do they experience this role and what should be their ideal role? These are the questions of a study undertaken to gain insight into the role of nurses in euthanasia. Answers to these questions were derived from 20 semistructured in-depth interviews with nurses employed in a Dutch hospital. To make clear the role of nurses in euthanasia, the issue was split up into four phases: observation of a request for euthanasia; decision making; carrying out of the request; and aftercare. This article is a brief report on the most important results regarding these four phases. Special attention will be paid to nurses who have conscientious objections. To evaluate the study results, an unambiguous interpretation of the concept of 'euthanasia' is of most importance. For that reason, Dutch laws and other regulations concerning euthanasia will be explained.
This article describes the experiences of nurses concerning the activities related to euthanasia of patients with aids. The nurses were employed in departments where relatively young, mature people wanted to arrange their own death. Our findings are based on six in-depth interviews with experienced nurses, that are part of a qualitative study into the experiences of nurses in taking leave of terminal patients with aids. The research strategy was based on the Grounded Theory. In order to analyse the experiences of the nurses, four phases were distinguished: set date and time unto application of lethal agent; application unto becoming unconscious; unconsciousness to death; death until transferring the body from the unit. Feelings that occur when taking leave of the patient, if not already taken care of at an earlier instant, play a major role in the phase from application to becoming unconscious. The fact that a deadly agent is being administered can generate feelings of guilt and anxiety. The period from unconsciousness to death is one of waiting. During this period nurses feel alienated and alone. The nurses indicated explicitly that an adequate preparation, evaluation and support are extremely important.
OBJECTIVE: To record doctors' attitudes towards, and practice of, active voluntary euthanasia (AVE) and physician-assisted suicide (PAS) in New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. METHODS: A postal survey was sent to a random sample of 2000 practitioners on the Medical Register of NSW (which includes medical practitioners in the ACT). RESULTS: Almost half the practitioners had been asked to perform euthanasia, of whom 28% had complied. Of practitioners asked to assist with suicide, 7% had complied. There was majority support for changes to the law concerning euthanasia. CONCLUSIONS: There are relatively high levels of support for, and practice of, AVE and PAS by medical practitioners in New South Wales and the ACT, suggesting that the current legislation should be reviewed.
This article is one of two which report findings of research which examined the attitudes and practices of health professionals in South Australia towards the management of death, dying and euthanasia. The focus in this article is on findings related to nurses. Conducted in August 1991, mail-back, self-administered questionnaires were posted to a sample of 500 nurses on the general nurses register held by the Nurses Board of South Australia. A total response rate of 57.8% was obtained, and 55% (278) were usable returns. The survey found that 47% of the respondents had received requests from patients to hasten their deaths by withdrawing treatment, and 30% had received request from patients for active euthanasia. 'Persistent and irrelievable pain' was the main reason for such requests. The majority either would or did discuss such requests with relatives, other medical practitioners and nursing staff. Nineteen per cent had taken active steps which had brought about the death of a patient. Eighty-two per cent thought that guidelines for withholding and withdrawal of treatment should be established. Sixty per cent were in favour of legalization of active euthanasia under certain circumstances.
This article presents the results of a survey of the attitudes and practices of nurses in Victoria with regard to requests for active or passive help in dying from patients who were suffering from a terminal or incurable disease. Questionnaires were sent to 1942 nurses who had been selected at random, 943 nurses (49%) of whom returned completed questionnaires. The survey indicates that a clear majority of those who responded to the questionnaire support active voluntary euthanasia. Many nurses have collaborated with doctors in the provision of active voluntary euthanasia and a few have acted without consulting a doctor. Seventy-eight per cent of nurses thought the law should be changed to allow doctors to take active steps to bring about a patient's death under some circumstances; and 65% of nurses indicated that they would be willing to collaborate with doctors in the provision of active voluntary euthanasia if it were legal.
BACKGROUND: Recent national guidelines emphasize the requirement for all general practitioners to manage drug users within a shared care scheme and suggest that a primary health care liaison worker (PHCLW) may facilitate these arrangements. We undertook a group-randomized, randomized controlled trial to determine the effectiveness of a PHCLW in promoting shared care. METHODS: Primary health care teams in Stockport Health Authority, North West England, were randomly allocated to either an intervention arm, who were offered the services of a PHCLW, or to a control arm, who were offered standard support from the community drug team (CDT). The proportion of CDT clients with a history of regular opiate misuse who were in shared care 12 months after randomization was compared across study arms. RESULTS: Eighteen (24.0 per cent) of the 75 CDT clients in the intervention arm but none of the 80 CDT clients in the control arm were in shared care at 12 months (chi2 = 9.37, df = 1, p < 0.01; 95 per cent confidence interval 8.6-39.4 per cent). CONCLUSION: A PHCLW can significantly increase the number of CDT clients in shared care arrangements.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of an individual support (IS) intervention including intensified primary healthcare on the utilisation of specialist care among cancer patients, and to investigate if such an effect was modified by the patient's age (less than 70 years or 70 years and more). Newly diagnosed cancer patients (n=416) were randomised between the intervention and a control condition, and data were collected on the utilisation of specialist care within 3 months from inclusion. Intensified primary healthcare comprised extended information from the specialist clinics, and education and supervision in cancer care for general practitioners (GPs) and home-care nurses. The support given also included interventions designed to diminish problems of weight loss and psychological distress. The intervention reduced the number of admissions (NoA) and the days of hospitalisation (DoH) after adjustment for weight loss and psychological distress, but only for older patients. Older patients randomised to the intervention (n=82) experienced 393 fewer DoH than the older control patients (n=79). In addition, the proportion of older patients in the IS group who utilised acute specialist care was smaller compared with older control patients group. The conclusion is that older cancer patients' utilisation of specialist care may be reduced by intensified primary healthcare services.
BACKGROUND: Few formalized shared care schemes exist within psychiatry and the evidence base for sharing psychiatric care is weak. AIMS: To evaluate the utility of patient-held shared care records for individuals with long-term mental illness. METHOD: Cluster-randomised controlled parallel-group 12-month trial involving 90 patients with long-term mental illness drawn from 28 general practices. RESULTS: Carrying a shared care record had no significant effect on mental state or satisfaction with psychiatric services. Compared with controls, patients in the shared care group were no more likely to be admitted (relative risk 1.2, 95% CI 0.86-1.67) and attend clinic (relative risk 0.96, 95% CI 0.67-1.36) over the study period. Uptake of the shared care scheme was low by patients and professionals alike. Subjects with psychotic illness were significantly less likely to use their records (relative risk 0.51, 95% CI 0.27-0.99). CONCLUSIONS: Patient-held records may not be helpful for patients with long-term mental illness.
Quality report cards have become common in many health care markets. This study evaluates their effectiveness by examining the impact of the New York State (NYS) Cardiac Surgery Reports on selection of cardiac surgeons. The analyses compares selection of surgeons in 1991 (pre-report publication) and 1992 (post-report publication). We find that the information about a surgeon's quality published in the reports influences selection directly and diminishes the importance of surgeon experience and price as signals for quality. Furthermore, selection of surgeons for black patients is as sensitive to the published information as is the selection for white patients.
We test the effect of report cards on consumer choice in the HMO market. Federal employees were provided with report cards on a limited basis in 1995 and then on a widespread basis in 1996. Exploiting this natural experiment, we find that subjective measures of quality and coverage influence plan choices, after controlling for plan premiums, expected out of pocket expenses and service coverages. The effect is stronger within a small sample of new hires compared to a larger sample of existing federal employees. We also find evidence that report cards increase the price elasticity of demand for health insurance.
Since 1989 the New York State Department of Health has published annual data on risk-adjusted mortality following coronary artery bypass graft surgery by hospital and surgeon. It was the first such program in the nation and is now the most long-lived. Many hospitals were prompted by the data to improve their cardiac surgery programs, and statewide mortality fell substantially as a result. This paper examines what physicians and hospitals did in response to the data, how the market reacted, and whether this approach to quality measurement and improvement could be used more widely.
The Cleveland Health Quality Choice (CHQC) project was previously suggested to have been responsible for declines in inpatient mortality in Cleveland hospitals during the first years of the project (1992-1993). We sought to (a) verify this decline in mortality and (b) better understand its possible relationship to CHQC. We employed regression analysis to compare mortality rate trends for Cleveland versus the rest of Ohio using Ohio Hospital Association inpatient mortality data. We found that the rate of decline in mortality in Cleveland (-.218% per 6 months; 95% confidence limits, -.278% to -.159% per 6 months) was statistically indistinguishable from that in the rest of the state (-.188% per 6 months; 95% confidence limits, -.234% to -.143% per 6 months) (P = .35). We could not demonstrate a significant beneficial effect of the CHQC project on hospital mortality in Cleveland. Inpatient mortality was simultaneously declining at a statistically indistinguishable rate throughout the state.
This paper presents an empirical analysis of the effects of providing information about plan quality on consumers' health plan choices in a private employment setting. Analysis of plan switching behavior suggests that the provision of quality information had a small, but significant effect on consumer plan choices. Employees were more likely to switch from plans with lower reported quality. Cross-sectional analyses of plan choice indicate that reported quality played a role in plan selection even after controlling for other health plan characteristics commonly associated with plan choice. The age of the policyholder and the type of policy purchased moderated the effects of plan characteristics on plan choice in ways that may be consequential for adverse selection.
How does the release of health plan performance ratings influence employee health plan choice? A natural experiment at General Motors (GM) Corporation provides valuable evidence on this question. During the 1997 open enrollment period, GM disseminated a health plan report card for the first time. By comparing 1996 and 1997 enrollment patterns, our analysis estimates the impact of the report card information while accounting for fixed, unobserved plan traits. Results indicate that employees are less likely to enroll in plans requiring relatively high out-of-pocket contributions. Results with respect to report card ratings suggest that individuals avoid health plans with many below average ratings.
The author compares the results of MCOs that have publicly reported their Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS) rates for 1997 through 1999 with health plans that did not report publicly. Managed care plans that publicly reported for three consecutive years performed better on preventive health measures than those that did not. Newer measures, such as beta-blocker treatment after a heart attack, showed the greatest improvement over time. Health care plans rated high in consumer experience also had higher clinical performance rates. Finally, plans that sought accreditation by the National Committee for Quality Assurance had better performance on their HEDIS measures, although the differences narrowed for those reporting HEDIS rates for three consecutive years.
Using recently available survey data for Tajikistan, this study explores changes in the pattern of maternal health care during the last decade and the extent to which inequalities in access to that care have emerged. In particular, the links between poverty and women's educational status and the use of maternal health-care services are investigated. The survey findings demonstrate a significant decline in the use of maternal health-care services in Tajikistan since the country gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. They show changes in the location of delivery and the person providing assistance, with a clear shift away from giving birth in a medical facility toward giving birth at home. More than two-fifths of all women who gave birth in the year prior to the survey delivered their baby at home. Women from the poorest quintile are three times more likely than women from the richest quintile to undergo a home delivery without a trained assistant.
This study aims to clarify women's knowledge on obstetric care and to analyse the situation of maternal health care (MHC) utilization in southern Laos. Face to face structured questionnaire and focus group discussions were carried out for 205 mothers aged 29.6 +/- 6.7 who had children under the age of five. Three measurements of MHC utilization comprised: 1) antenatal care (ANC), 2) tetanus toxoid (TT) inoculation, and 3) attendance delivery by health professional. Women's knowledge on obstetric care was scored. Women's knowledge was positively correlated with ANC and TT inoculation. It was found that the women with strong superstitious belief were less likely to utilize all three types of MHC than the others. Accessibility to health care facilities strongly affected ANC and attendance delivery. Enhancing women's knowledge on obstetric care and reducing barriers related with sociocultural beliefs are essential to improving maternal health in southern Laos.
This paper examines the determinants of place of delivery and childbirth attendant in Kenya based on the 1993 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey data. The analysis utilizes multilevel logistic and multilevel multinomial regression models for the place of delivery and the type of childbirth attendant, respectively. The results show that delivery care in Kenya is determined by a wide range of factors: socioeconomic and cultural factors associated with the individual woman or her household, her demographic status or reproductive behavior relating to a specific birth, as well as availability and accessibility of health services within her community. In addition, a significant variation in delivery care behavior is observed between women and between communities, implying that there are unobserved factors within families and communities that have a significant effect on delivery care. The woman or family effect on delivery care is particularly strong, but varies by distance to the nearest delivery care facility.
A cross sectional study was conducted in 14 selected villages of Gazipur Thana with the aim to find the prevalence of home deliveries and ante natal care coverage. All those females who delivered in the recent past (within last three months) from the selected villages were the study population Data were collected by two trained interviewers with a semi-structured interview schedule. Study result shows that 83% of the respondents received ante natal check-up throughout their last pregnancy. Most of this group (88.5%) received this care from "Health Assistant or 'Family Welfare visitor's while only 3.1% received care from graduate doctors. Out of 505 respondents 91.3% of the respondents was found to have delivered at home while only 8.7% at institutions. Study findings also suggested that there was association of place of delivery with level of education and family income of the respondents. Also there was associations of utilisation of antenatal care with level of education and family income of the respondents.
The dimensions of women's autonomy and their relationship to maternal health care utilization were investigated in a probability sample of 300 women in Varanasi, India. We examined the determinants of women's autonomy in three areas: control over finances, decision-making power, and freedom of movement. After we control for age, education, household structure, and other factors, women with closer ties to natal kin were more likely to have greater autonomy in each of these three areas. Further analyses demonstrated that women with greater freedom of movement obtained higher levels of antenatal care and were more likely to use safe delivery care. The influence of women's autonomy on the use of health care appears to be as important as other known determinants such as education.
In order to improve living standards among the rural poor, the government of Nepal has invested heavily in improving the provision of health care services in rural areas. The purpose of this paper is to assess the impact of this investment on the use of maternal health care services. A bivariate probit model is used to estimate the effect of physical access to government health care services, along with individual-, household-, and other location-specific characteristics, on the use of prenatal care and birth delivery care. The results of the estimation are used to carry out policy simulations that assess the magnitude of the impact of improvements in health care availability on service utilization. The results indicate that physical access to a health care facility, as it is currently structured in rural areas, has a statistically significant but modest impact on the use of maternal services.
This paper assesses the relationship between unintended pregnancy--both unwanted and mistimed and several dimensions of use of prenatal care among women in Ecuador, where the level of unintended pregnancy has risen considerably in recent years. Data were collected from a nationally representative sample of 3988 women interviewed in the 1994 Demographic and Maternal-Child Health Survey. Multivariate logistic regression was used to assess jointly the effect of pregnancy intention status (unwanted, mistimed, planned) on three aspects of prenatal care use while controlling for potential confounders. Women with unwanted pregnancies were 32% less likely than women with planned pregnancies to seek out prenatal care. Women with unwanted pregnancies were also 25% less likely to initiate care in the first trimester and 29% less likely to receive at least an adequate number of visits. Mistimed pregnancy was not associated with receiving care, timely initiation of care or receiving an adequate number of visits.
Using data from the 1993 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (GDHS), this study investigates the demographic and sociocultural determinants of use of maternal health services. The maternal health services considered in this study are: i) use of a doctor for prenatal care; ii) soliciting antenatal check-up; iii) place of delivery and, iv) family planning. Logistic regression is employed to explore the relative importance of age at marriage, number of living children, education, place of residence, occupation, region of residence, religion, ethnicity, and age on the likelihood of using maternal health services. Multivariate analyses reveal that the use of the four maternal health services under study tend to be shaped mostly by level of education, place of residence, region of residence, occupation, and religion. Programmatic implications of these results are discussed.
Data from the 1991 Belize Family Health Survey show differentials in the use of maternal and child health services between ethnic groups (Creole, Mestizo, Maya/Ketchi and Garifuna). Multivariate analysis is used to explore whether such differentials can truly be attributed to ethnicity or to other characteristics that distinguish the ethnic groups. Health services considered are: family planning, place of delivery (hospital/other), postpartum and newborn check-ups after a birth, and immunisations for children. The language usually spoken in the household is found to be important for interpreting ethnic differentials. Mayan-speaking Maya/Ketchis are significantly less likely to use family planning services or to give birth in a hospital. Spanish-speakers (Mestizos and Maya/Ketchis) are less likely to use newborn and postpartum check-ups, after controlling for other characteristics. There are no ethnic differentials for immunisations. Programmatic implications of these results are discussed.
The value of postoperative salvage and re-infusion of drained blood was assessed in 155 patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty for primary knee osteoarthritis. In group A (n = 77), standard vacuum drains were used. In group B (n = 78), an auto-transfusion system was used and the blood drained within 6 hours postoperatively was re-infused. Group B patients were further distributed into 2 subgroups, in one of which methylprednisolone was administered before blood re-perfusion. Patients who received autologous blood had higher levels of haemoglobin at 8 hours (p < 0.05) and 24 hours postoperatively (p < 0.01) and needed less allogeneic blood transfusion (p < 0.01). Methylprednisolone administration was found to attenuate the postoperative febrile reaction (p = 0.01).
A prospective study was undertaken to assess the efficacy and financial cost of the use of an autologous blood transfusion device in the reduction of allogeneic blood requirements of patients undergoing primary unilateral total knee arthroplasty. Forty-nine consecutive patients received either the CellTrans blood salvage device (group A of 32 patients) or the Redivac high vacuum drainage system (group B of 17 patients). The preoperative and postoperative haemoglobin levels were recorded at 72 or 96 hours. Nine percent of group A patients received an allogeneic blood transfusion compared to 59% in group B. There was an average saving of 1.1 unit of allogeneic blood per patient in group A (p<0.001). The total cost per patient was about Euro 111 less for the group A patients. Autologous re-infusion was found in this study to be an effective method of reducing allogeneic blood requirements and to afford significant cost savings in primary unilateral knee arthroplasty.
PURPOSE: To compare the use of a blood salvage and reinfusion system with standard allogeneic blood transfusion after total knee arthroplasty--a procedure associated with significant postoperative blood loss. METHODS: Between June 2002 and May 2004, 60 patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty were randomly allocated into a reinfusion group (n = 26) or a control group (n = 34). Patients in the reinfusion group had their blood reinfused from drains within 6 hours of surgery. Both groups received allogeneic blood transfusions according to specified transfusion criteria if the haemoglobin level fell below 90 g/l, or in the presence of severe anaemic symptoms. Haemoglobin levels and drain output were recorded daily for 3 consecutive days after surgery. RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the 2 groups in demographic data, drain output, total blood loss, and mean postoperative haemoglobin levels. Significantly more allogeneic blood was required by the control group than by the reinfusion group (p = 0.022). CONCLUSION: Postoperative reinfusion of drained blood reduced the need for blood transfusion after total knee arthroplasty, while having an effect on postoperative haemoglobin level equivalent to standard allogeneic blood transfusion.
A randomized prospective investigation included 143 patients (coronary shunting for IHD under conditions of extracorporeal circulation--EC). In 55 patients exfusion of autoblood followed by its transfusion after finishing EC was made before operation in 88 patients. A cell saver was used in all the patients from the moment of cutting the skin for the collection of blood and for the collection of perfusate left in the EC apparatus after finishing EC and for autotransfusion of the drainage fluid released after operation. The preoperative reservation of autoblood in patients with IHD for operations of coronary bypass under conditions of EC and using the cell saver gives higher values of hemoglobin and erythrocytes by the moment of discharge of the patients from the hospital, but non the less does not reduce the frequency of using homologous blood.
We compared allogeneic blood usage for two groups of patients undergoing total knee replacement surgery (TKR). Patients were randomized to receive either their post-operative wound drainage as an autotransfusion (n=115) after processing or to have this wound drainage discarded (n=116). Allogeneic blood was transfused in patients of either group whose haemoglobin fell below 9 g dl(-1). Only 7% of patients in the autotransfusion group required an allogeneic transfusion compared with 28% in the control group (P<0.001). There was no hospital mortality and only 3% mortality from all causes at the study completion, which spanned 6 months to 3 yr. There was a higher incidence of infection requiring intervention in the allogeneic group (P<0.036). Total patient costs were Pound Sterling 113 greater in the autotransfusion group. We conclude that in this type of surgery post-operative cell salvage is a safe and effective method for reducing allogeneic blood use.
PURPOSE: The net benefit of routine intraoperative autotransfusion (IAT) in patients undergoing elective infrarenal aortic surgery was studied. METHODS: One hundred patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair (n = 50) or aortofemoral bypass (AFB) for occlusive disease (n = 50) were randomized to IAT and control groups. This experience accounted for 58% of patients undergoing aortic surgery during the 16-month study period. RESULTS: IAT and control groups were balanced for preoperative demographics, disease (50:50 split of AFB:AAA in each group), and risk factors. There were no significant differences between patients randomized to IAT and control patients in estimated blood loss (EBL), allogeneic blood transfusion (units administered intraoperatively, postoperatively, and total), proportion of patients not receiving allogeneic blood (34% of patients randomized to IAT and 28% of control patients), postoperative hemoglobin/hematocrit levels, and complications. IAT did not reduce allogeneic blood transfusion among all patients undergoing aortic surgery nor in any subgroups that might be more likely to benefit, such as those undergoing AAA repair, those with 1000 mL or more EBL, and those receiving larger volumes of IAT-processed blood. CONCLUSION: We could find no net benefit of IAT in patients undergoing elective, infrarenal aortic surgery.
We conducted a prospective, randomized study to assess the impact of cell salvage, auto transfusion on the requirements for allogeneic blood for patients undergoing a total knee replacement (TKR). One hundred consecutive TKR patients were randomly allocated to receive either autologous blood (using cell salvage) or an allogeneic blood transfusion as necessary. Patients allocated to the autologous group were rescued with allogeneic blood if the postoperative haemoglobin fell below 9 g dL-1. Forty-two (84%) of 50 patients in the autologous group required no supplementary blood transfusion. Forty (80%) of 50 patients allocated to receive allogeneic blood required transfusion. There were no detrimental effects of autologous blood transfusion. We conclude that autologous blood transfusion, using the cell saver system, is a safe and effective method of reducing the need for allogeneic blood transfusion and, in doing so, reduces the risk of transmission of infections associated with allogeneic blood transfusion, whilst decreasing demand on precious allogeneic blood reserves.
OBJECTIVES: To determine if cell-salvaged autologous blood can serve as an alternative to homologous blood, and to examine the incidence of infected complications and length of postoperative stay. DESIGN: A prospective randomised study comprising autologous and homologous blood transfusions in patients undergoing elective infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery. METHODS: Fifty patients undergoing AAA surgery were prospectively randomised to homologous blood (n = 27), or autologous blood transfusion (n = 23), using a cell salvage autotransfusion device. RESULTS: The haemoglobin at the time of hospital discharge was similar for both groups (11.0 vs. 10.8 g/dl) with no difference in perioperative mortality. The length of stay was reduced in those patients who received autologous blood (9 days vs. 12 days, p < 0.05 Mann-Whitney U test). There were four infected cases in the autologous group and 12 in the homologous group (p = n.s., Fisher's exact probability test). However, patients who received 3-4 units of homologous blood had an increased risk of infection compared to those who received a similar amount of autologous blood (50% vs. 0%). CONCLUSIONS: Cell salvage autologous blood can safely replace, or at least decrease, exposure to homologous blood transfusion, with a reduction in the mean hospital stay.
We have carried out a randomised, controlled trial on 70 patients having unilateral total knee replacement in which transfusion was either with homologous bank blood or by reinfusion of unwashed blood salvaged after operation. No complications or adverse effects were observed from reinfusion. The need for bank blood was reduced by 86% in the reinfusion group but, more importantly, the number of infective episodes was significantly less when the use of bank blood was avoided. The mean length of stay in hospital was also reduced by more than two days.
This prospective study was designed to determine whether the autotransfusion of shed mediastinal blood (ATS) after open heart surgery is safe and effective. Forty-two patients undergoing cardiac operation were randomized to receive either nonwashed shed mediastinal blood (group 1; n = 22) or banked blood (group 2: n = 20). No difference in mean age (group 1: 49 +/- 11 years; group 2: 45 +/- 12 years), coronary artery bypass grafting (group 1: n = 5, 23%; group 2: n = 6, 30%), valve replacement (group 1: n = 17, 77%, group 2: n = 14, 70%), and mean preoperative hemoglobin level (group 1: 13.7 +/- 2.3, group 2: 14.4 +/- 1.6) was noted between non-ATS and ATS groups (p = not significant). The mean hemoglobin levels after operation were similar in the two groups (group 1: 11.89 +/- 1.52; group 2: 12.03 +/- 1.34). No difference in the mean blood loss 4, 6 and 24 hours after operation (group 1: 33 +/- 190, 420 +/- 340 and 550 +/- 300; group 2: 340 +/- 230, 420 +/- 280 and 670 +/- 380) was observed between the two groups. The mean volume autotransfused in group I was 380 +/- 230 ml (200 approximately 1300 ml). In group I, the patients required bank blood 1080 +/- 720, compared with 1780 +/- 1045 in group II. The bank blood requirement in group I reducted by 40%. These data demonstrate that ATS after open heart surgery is safe and effective.
The efficacy of predeposited autologous blood transfusion (PABT) with and without intra/postoperative blood salvage to reduce or eliminate the need for homologous blood transfusion (HBT) in primary total hip or knee replacement surgery was investigated by retrospective and prospective studies. Depending on the type of surgery, one to three units of PABT eliminated the need for HBT in 50 to 78% of patients, but, intra/postoperative blood salvage alone reduced the need only in 11 to 29%. In contrast, blood salvage, when combined with three units of PABT, eliminated the need for HBT in all patients undergoing primary joint replacement surgery. A cost comparison analysis showed that blood salvage was more expensive than PABT, and therefore it should be limited to patients who had predeposited fewer than three units of autologous blood.
A prospective, randomized study was conducted in 24 patients using the Solcotrans Orthopaedic Drainage Reinfusion System (Smith & Nephew Richards Inc, Memphis, Tenn) for postoperative blood salvage in total joint arthroplasty. The amount of postoperative autologous blood salvage averaged 946 mL. Only 25% of the study group required postoperative transfusions, compared to 83% of the control group (P = .016). In total knee arthroplasties, only 11% of the study group required transfusions, compared to 78% of the control group (P = .018). There were no transfusion reactions, infectious complications, or coagulopathies. Postoperative blood salvage is a safe, reliable, and effective source of autologous blood.
A series of 40 patients undergoing primary unilateral total knee arthroplasty were entered into a randomised controlled trial to assess the safety and efficacy of postoperative autologous blood salvage and reinfusion. The mean volume of autologous blood reinfused was 520 ml per patient (51% of the mean total drainage). Homologous blood transfusion was required in only 35% of patients in the study group compared with 95% of patients in the control group (P less than 0.001). The mean volume of homologous blood transfused was 0.9 units per patient in the study group compared with 2.5 units in the control group (P less than 0.001), a saving of 64%.
We undertook a prospective controlled clinical trial of 109 patients to determine whether postoperative blood salvage in patients undergoing total hip or knee arthroplasty decreased the need for transfusion with banked blood. The average amount of blood collected in our series was 493 ml, most of which was collected in the first four postoperative hours. In patients undergoing bilateral total knee arthroplasty, there was a 54% reduction in banked blood utilisation. None of our patients developed adverse effects from the reinfused material. The cost of collecting and processing wound drainage using the Haemolite cell washer was $175 per patient, regardless of the volume processed, compared to $125 for a unit of banked blood. By reducing the requirement for homologous transfusion, blood salvage diminishes the risks of transmission of HIV and hepatitis viruses. In those cases where the equivalent of two units of blood are reinfused, blood salvage saves money. However, due to the small amounts of blood collected in unilateral hip or knee arthroplasty, we do not recommend its routine application in these cases.
We conducted a prospective, randomized, controlled trial comparing homologous blood consumption between groups of patients receiving conventional mediastinal drainage (group 1) or reinfusion of shed mediastinal blood (group 2) using hard-shell cardiotomy reservoir. One hundred consecutive patients who had elective coronary artery or valvular operations were studied. The two groups were comparable with regard to age, sex, weight, preoperative and postoperative hemoglobin levels, and surgical procedure. Group 2 patients had their shed mediastinal blood reinfused for up to 18 hours postoperatively; otherwise, the two groups were treated identically. For groups 1 and 2, average mediastinal blood losses were 705 +/- 522 and 822 +/- 445 mL and homologous blood consumption was 3.83 +/- 2.58 and 3.15 +/- 2.05 U, respectively (neither measure was significantly different). However, if blood losses exceeded 500 mL, there was a statistically significant reduction in homologous blood requirements in group 2 as compared with matched controls in group 1. This difference was most significant in patients with the greatest mediastinal losses.
Twenty-five patients having aortic surgery had blood scavenged using the Sorenson Receptal Device (Group A) and were compared with twenty-five patients having homologous blood transfusion (Group H). Mean intraoperative blood loss was similar in both groups, Group A 3224 (SD 2392) ml, Group H 2999 (SD 1579) ml, but the mean homologous blood replacement was significantly different intraoperatively, Group A 1.2 (SD 1.7) units, Group H 2.7 (SD 1.8) units. Total intra-hospital homologous blood replacement was not significantly different, Group A 4.0 (SD 3.4) units, Group H 5.5 (SD 5.8) units. Mean haemoglobin concentration in the scavenged blood was 8.5 (SD 2.1) g/dl compared to 10.8 (SD 2.4) g/dl in the median aged homologous blood units crossmatched for Group H. Mean red cell half life in the scavenged blood was the same as that for the homologous blood, 24 (SD 5) days, but plasma-free haemoglobin and bacterial contamination was greater in the scavenged blood. There was no difference in the incidence of postoperative renal dysfunction, coagulopathy or mortality between the two groups of patients.
In a randomized prospective study of patients having cardiac surgery, autologous blood collected from mediastinal tubes was autotransfused preferentially in 63 patients (ATS), whereas 51 patients received bank blood for transfusion (control). Comparison of the two groups showed no significant difference in regard to age, sex, operations performed, or total postoperative bleeding (ATS 813 +/- 121 ml. per square meter versus control 711 +/- 93 ml. per square meter; N.S.) Although mean postoperative blood replacement was similar in the two groups (ATS 4.3 +/- 0.6 units per patient versus control 4.8 +/- 0.6 units per patient), requirements for transfusion of stored bank blood were reduced by 50 percent in the ATS group (ATS 2.4 +/- 0.3 units per patient versus control 4.8 +/- 0.6 units per patient; p less than 0.005). Coagulation studies demonstrated that this blood was defibrinogenated; yet it contains significantly more platelets and clotting factors than does bank blood. In this study, autotransfusion of shed mediastinal blood was safe and simple. It significantly reduced bank blood requirements and resulted in substantial financial savings for the patients and the hospital.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review assessed the risks of pneumonia associated with long-term inhaled corticosteroid use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The authors concluded that there is a significantly increased risk of pneumonia associated with these treatments, without a concomitant increase in mortality. This conclusion was based on the evidence of the review and is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This generally well-conducted review found that antiviral drugs (oseltamivir and zanamivir) shortened the duration of illness in children with seasonal influenza and reduced transmission to other children in the household, although these effects were small. The conclusions appear to be reliable for seasonal influenza, but their applicability to H1N1 pandemic influenza is uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the effectiveness and acceptability of paroxetine in major depression, concluding paroxetine was not superior to placebo in terms of the proportion of study participants discontinuing treatment for any reason. Paoxetine had a modest effect in terms of depression measures. The conclusions appeared broadly appropriate, although they possibly overemphasised the less meaningful efficacy outcome of treatment withdrawal.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there were many options for first and subsequent lines of therapy, including chemotherapy and targeted therapies, that have comparable efficacy in advanced breast cancer. Overall, the authors' conclusions appear valid, but the lack of any assessment of trial quality and the use of both direct and indirect evidence, suggests that the findings should be interpreted cautiously.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that comparative data of intensity modulated radiotherapy with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy appeared to support the theory that higher doses can improve biochemical survival with localised prostate cancer. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution due to the possibility of language bias, limited quality of the included studies and a lack of rigour in the review process.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review concluded that antidepressant medication is efficacious in treating depression in out-patient men who are positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The authors noted that women and ethnic minorities were under-represented in the included studies, so the findings cannot be generalised to all depressed individuals who are HIV-positive. These conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that chemotherapy in children with acute lymphocytic leukaemia is associated with a temporary reduction in antibody levels against specific diseases and re-vaccination may be required. The evidence was based on a very small number of children in few studies and the results varied widely across studies. This suggests that a more cautious conclusion might be appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that current evidence does not support the use of statins to prevent fractures. Although these conclusions appear to be well supported by the evidence presented, they require some caution in interpretation given the uncertainties and weaknesses in the review process, lack of prospective randomised evidence and differences between the primary studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there is limited evidence to suggest that high-risk elderly patients without a known risk of coronary artery disease may benefit from statin treatment, but more trials are needed. Overall, despite the poor reporting of the review methods, the authors' cautious conclusions and recommendations for further research appear reliable given the limitations of the included data.
CRD SUMMARY: The author concluded that total hysterectomy reduces prolapse and urinary incontinence, while operation time, bleeding and post-operative complications occur less often with subtotal hysterectomy. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution given the possibility of language and publication bias and failure to appropriately evaluate study quality.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that there is no evidence to support the suggestion that antidepressant drugs of the selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor class that have a low milk-to-plasma ratio should be preferred for breast-feeding women. Although the review suffered from a number of limitations, the conclusions are supported by the data presented and are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review evaluated the precision and accuracy of clinical variables and tests, compared with histology, for diagnosing bacterial ventilator-associated pneumonia. It concluded that radiographic information together with routine bedside evaluations may be indicative of ventilator-associated pneumonia, but additional tests should be considered. The conclusions should be regarded with caution given the shortcomings in review methodology.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that, though the majority of the results of intervention studies were promising, there was no evidence that educational intervention programmes can prevent lower back pain in schoolchildren. Despite the potential for relevant studies to have been missed and the limited included evidence, these conclusions appear appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that there is insufficient evidence for the use of statins solely for the prevention of dementia, but that the results from current ongoing trials will help provide a more definitive answer. The limited search, lack of a validity assessment and poorly structured synthesis mean it is difficult to assess the reliability of these conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found no association between statin therapy and the incidence of all cancers or site-specific cancers in the short term, independent of length of follow-up and type of statin. The authors' conclusions appear appropriate and are likely to be reliable. However, some studies with relevant data might have been missed.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined topical and oral complementary and alternative treatments for acne. The authors concluded that the evidence base was limited; this reflects the poor quality of most of the included studies. The review methodology was poorly reported and the reliability of the review's conclusions is therefore unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that spinal cord stimulation is effective for complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) type I (high-quality evidence) and type II (low-quality evidence). The reliability of these conclusions is unclear because the supporting evidence was limited, even for CRPS type I.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found reductions of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol decreased with statin dose. Equivalent doses could be found for most statins to achieve common goals of LDL cholesterol levels. The authors' conclusions were based on the evidence presented, but some methodological flaws made the reliability of the conclusions unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of t'ai chi on patients with chronic medical conditions. The authors concluded that t'ai chi appears to have physiological and psychosocial benefits, but well-designed studies are required. Given that the studies were generally of a poor quality and methodological details of the review process were absent, the conclusions about efficacy should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This was a well-conducted meta-analysis of patient level data on the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on survival in invasive bladder cancer. The findings showed that neoadjuvant platinum combination chemotherapy confers a clear survival benefit in patients with invasive bladder cancer. There is no evidence to support the use of single-agent platinum neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared pre-operative (neoadjuvant) systemic therapy with post-operative (adjuvant) therapy for breast cancer using the same regimen. The authors concluded that neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy appear equivalent in terms of survival and overall disease progression, but neoadjuvant therapy is associated with an increased risk of loco-regional recurrence when radiotherapy is used without surgery. The poor quality of the included studies may limit the reliability of these conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed whether new-generation antipsychotic drugs cause fewer extra-pyramidal side effects (EPS) than low-potency conventional antipsychotics. The authors concluded that new-generation drugs might cause EPS equivalent to optimum doses of conventional treatments, and that these drugs might be more effective than conventional treatments. This was a well-conducted review which pointed to the need for further trials in this area.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated the effect of statin therapy on cancer incidence and death from cancer. The authors concluded that statins have no effect on cancer risk; this finding applied to all statins and all types of cancer investigated. This was a well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness of topical treatments for seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. The authors concluded that topical mast cell stabilisers and topical antihistamines are superior to placebo, but there is insufficient evidence for the superiority of one type of medication. The authors' conclusions appear to be supported by the evidence presented, but many studies were short term and there was evidence of publication bias.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed total disc replacement as a treatment for chronic lower-back pain. There was insufficient evidence on safety and efficacy to assess the performance of total disc replacement adequately. The authors' conclusions reflect the paucity of evidence found by the review.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) with alternative surgical techniques for rectal tumours. The few studies found were of a poor quality and/or poorly reported. The authors' conclusion that evidence regarding TEM is limited appears reliable. Their conclusion that TEM may result in fewer recurrences than local excision of adenomas was derived from one poorly reported study and may not be reliable.
An evidence-based systematic review including scientific evidence, expert opinion, folkloric precedent, history, pharmacology, kinetics/dynamics, interactions, adverse effects, toxicology, and dosing.

Over the past few years, there has been an increase in the number of studies reporting on various aspects of the Atraumatic Restorative Treatment (ART) approach. Five randomized clinical trials in which ART restorations with glass ionomers were compared with amalgam restorations in permanent teeth for a maximum period of 3 yrs constituted the database. This meta-analysis divided the publications into 'early' (1987-1992) and 'late' (1995-) studies on the basis of improvements in the approach. The analysis showed that, in the 'early' studies, single-surface amalgam restorations survived statistically significantly longer than comparable ART restorations after 1, 2, and 3 yrs. This trend did not continue into the late group of studies; no statistically significant difference between the 2 types of restorations was found. Based on the available data, it appears that there is no difference in survival results between single-surface ART restorations and amalgam restorations in permanent teeth over the first 3 yrs.

Little is currently known about the context, nature, or frequency of nurses' responses to patient requests for help in dying. Only two empirical studies have surveyed American nurses about their actual responses to such requests. In one of those studies, 441 New England oncology nurses described how often patients ask them for help in ending their lives and also indicated how often they participated in assisted suicide and patient-requested euthanasia. One hundred and ten of those 441 nurses wrote comments on their returned questionnaires. This article describes the content analysis of those comments. Those oncology nurses who wrote have much to say about caring for patients at the end of life.
Data from a household survey were used to analyse the distribution of newborn deliveries in a rural area of Kenya. It was found that 52% of deliveries occurred at home or with traditional birth attendants. Using regression techniques, the most significant predictors of choosing an informal delivery setting are the household's distance from the nearest maternity bed and whether a household member has insurance. The results suggest that travel time is an important barrier to access. Therefore, quality improvements at existing facilities may not result in greater use of modern sector delivery, particularly if improvements are partially offset by user fees.
We undertook a prospective randomised controlled trial to investigate the efficacy of autologous retransfusion drains in reducing the need for allogenic blood requirement after unilateral total knee replacement. We also monitored the incidence of post-operative complications. There were 86 patients in the control group, receiving standard care with a vacuum drain, and 92 who received an autologous drain and were retransfused postoperatively. Following serial haemoglobin measurements at 24, 48 and 72 hours, we found no difference in the need for allogenic blood between the two groups (control group 15.1%, retransfusion group 13% (p = 0.439)). The incidence of post-operative complications, such as wound infection, deep-vein thrombosis and chest infection, was also comparable between the groups. There were no adverse reactions associated with the retransfusion of autologous blood. Based on this study, the cost-effectiveness and continued use of autologous drains in total knee replacement should be questioned.
Clinical, haematological or economic benefits of post-operative blood salvage with autologous blood re-transfusion have yet to be clearly demonstrated for primary total hip replacement. We performed a prospective randomised study to analyse differences in postoperative haemoglobin levels and homologous blood requirements in two groups of patients undergoing primary total hip replacement. A series of 158 patients was studied. In one group two vacuum drains were used and in the other the ABTrans autologous retransfusion system. A total of 58 patients (76%) in the re-transfusion group received autologous blood. There was no significant difference in the mean post-operative haemoglobin levels in the two groups. There were, however, significantly fewer patients with post-operative haemoglobin values less than 9.0 g/dl and significantly fewer patients who required transfusion of homologous blood in the re-transfusion group. There was also a small overall cost saving in this group.
Computers have been used in general practice to issue reminders to patients overdue for preventive procedures. Although effective, issuing reminders may be inconsistent with the belief that patients should take responsibility for their own health. To assess the effect of a reminder on subsequent use of influenza prevention services, this study examined the three-year immunization behavior of 1,175 patients 65 years or older who were part of a randomized controlled trial. During the middle year only, reminders were issued to patients in the experimental group. A comparison of immunization patterns over the three years in experimental and control groups indicated that the reminder both promoted independent action and engendered dependency on the reminder. The former, favorable effect was more frequent among younger patients; the latter, adverse effect was more common among older patients who visited the practice more frequently.

A total of 343 patients with previously untreated metastatic measurable colorectal carcinoma were studied to evaluate the impact on toxicity, response, and survival of leucovorin-modulated fluorouracil (5-FU). A maximally tolerated intravenous bolus loading course regimen of 5-FU alone (500 mg/m2 x 5 days every 4 weeks with 25 mg/m2 escalation) was compared with a high-dose leucovorin regimen (600 mg/m2 of 5-FU with 500 mg/m2 of leucovorin weekly for 6 weeks with a 2-week rest) and with a similar low-dose leucovorin regimen (600 mg/m2 of 5-FU with 25 mg/m2 of leucovorin weekly for 6 weeks with a 2-week rest). The dose-limiting toxicity for the two 5-FU and leucovorin regimens was gastrointestinal, specifically diarrhea; severe diarrhea was seen frequently, and treatment-related toxicity was implicated in the demise of 11 of the patients (5%). Significant improvements in response rates were observed with a response rate of 33 of 109 (30.3%) on the high-dose leucovorin regimen (P less than .01 v control); 13 of 107 (12.1%) on the 5-FU control; and 21 of 112 (18.8%) on the low-dose leucovorin regimen. A trend toward longer survival in the 5-FU plus high-dose leucovorin regimen was observed. In this study, leucovorin was shown to significantly enhance the therapeutic effect of 5-FU in metastatic colorectal carcinoma.

The effect of a six-week treatment by placebo, the calcium channel blocker nifedipine or the converting enzyme inhibitor captopril was assessed in normotensive patients with insulin-dependent diabetes and incipient nephropathy. In response to captopril and nifedipine, arterial pressure decreased slightly and to a similar extent. These drugs resulted in opposite effects on urinary albumin excretion (increase in urinary albumin excretion by 40% during nifedipine and decrease by 40% during captopril treatment). No change in urinary albumin excretion was observed in the placebo group. This observation of opposite changes in urinary albumin excretion in the presence of a similar fall in arterial pressure suggests that the effect of captopril and nifedipine on urinary albumin excretion results from some difference in their intrarenal action.

Federal guidelines for the treatment of acute low back pain were locally modified and made more specific. These guidelines were then programmed into a rule-based computer charting system which provides real-time advice regarding documentation, testing, treatment, and disposition of emergency department patients with this condition. In a time-series off-on experiment the system was shown to significantly improve documentation of the medical record and discharge instructions. There was little effect on the appropriateness of testing and treatment and the cost of care. These findings contrast with our previous experiment using a similar program for the care of health care workers exposed to body fluids. In that study both the appropriateness of care and the cost-effectiveness of care were substantially improved.

The three-phase preparation, which contains levonorgestrel, has a number of advantages compared to the traditional monophase combination preparations. With the same contraceptive reliability its cycle stability is very much better than the monophase preparations, which are 40% high dosed in the progestin proportion (levonorgestrel and desogestrel). The dose relations of the new preparation agree with the most recent scientific knowledge on the metabolism aspects of hormonal contraceptives. The hormone dosage in the various phases of the menstrual cycle is largely adapted to the plasma level course of beta-oestradiol and progesterone in the corresponding phases of the normal cycle.

A multicentre prospective randomized control trial was done to compare the efficacy and toxicity of ceftazidime with that of cefazolin/tobramycin in the treatment of hospitalized patients with non-pneumococcal pneumonia. The results for 50 patients are reported in this paper; 24 in the ceftazidime group and 26 in the cefazolin/tobramycin group. Measurements of clinical response show no differences between the two groups: the same is true for bacteriological response. Minimal toxicity was seen with both treatment groups. The results support the use of ceftazidime as single-drug treatment of hospitalized patients with pneumonia.

Onychomycosis is one of the most common causes of nail disease and one of the hardest to treat among fungal infections. A double-blind, vehicle-controlled study has been conducted to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Fungoid Tincture (Pedinol Pharmacal, Inc), for the treatment of fungal infection of the toenails. Ten patients with distal subungual onychomycosis were treated for twelve months with topical Fungoid Tincture. Another ten patients with the same ailment were treated with the vehicle alone. Once a month, clinical and global evaluation of the target nail was done, in addition to trimming and debridement of the nails. After twelve months of treatment, 90 percent of patients applying Fungoid Tincture showed negative results on culture. There were minimal adverse effects.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that compared to no surgery, bariatric surgery (both gastric banding and gastric by-pass) reduced the risk of global mortality, non-cardiovascular mortality and cardiovascular mortality in obese patients. This was a generally well-conducted review, but the low quality and variability of the evidence suggests the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that full-dose low molecular weight heparin treatment for three to six months was as safe as intermediate and prophylactic doses for long-term treatment of deep vein thrombosis. Evidence was based on indirect comparisons, which combined with an inadequate study quality assessment and small numbers of events for some analyses means that the conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the risk of stent thrombosis and in-stent late post-implantation of a drug-eluting stent was not related to in-stent late loss values. Despite the limitations of the review, there were a large number of included studies with similar and consistent results and the conclusions are likely to be reliable. Generalisability of the results was uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that an inferior vena cava filter can be placed in patients who cannot receive concomitant anticoagulation without placing them at significantly higher risk of venous thromboembolism. Potentially high risks of bias in the included studies and the variability between studies mean that the review findings may not be robust; therefore, the conclusions should be treated with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that neurothrombectomy devices were interesting treatment options for patients with acute ischaemic stroke, but there was a lack of high-quality research, especially on their comparative effectiveness. Despite potential bias in the selection of studies, the authors' conclusion reflects the evidence presented and is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review assessed the incidence of new brain lesions identified using diffusion-weighted imaging following either carotid angioplasty and stenting (CAS) or carotid endarterectomy and found CAS to be associated with significantly more new lesions after surgery. The authors' conclusions reflected the evidence presented, but potential biases in the review methodology made the reliability of the conclusions uncertain. 
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that staplers in bariatric surgery may not be uniformly reliable and staple line reinforcement did not seem to have any clear benefit for reduction of leaks. Wide variation between the studies, discrepancies between figures and text and potential bias in the review process mean the authors' conclusions should be viewed with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The review findings did not support the hypothesis that statins reduced the risk of infections. Despite some review limitations, the authors' conclusions appear appropriate and are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that according to limited evidence there were no significant differences between (S)-amlodipine 2.5mg and racemic amlodipine 5mg in blood pressure. (S)-amlodipine resulted in significantly less oedema, although not in higher quality studies. The review was well-conducted, but the results should be treated with caution due to the scarcity of high-quality studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that dopamine agonists, including ropinirole, exhibited a higher incidence of adverse effects than placebo. Ropinirole had a similar profile to other dopamine agonists in terms of adverse events. The level of clinical heterogeneity, reliance on indirect comparisons and the relatively limited search mean that some caution is required in interpreting the conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in combination with carboplatin therapy was a rational alternative to gemcitabine-carboplatin for treatment of patients with platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer. These conclusions should be interpreted with caution due to the limited methodological rigour of the included studies, some concerns in the review methods and the possibility of publication bias.
CRD SUMMARY: This generally well-conducted review concluded that transcatheter arterial chemoembolization combined with percutaneous ablation therapy (especially percutaneous ethanol injection) improved the overall survival status of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Given a number of issues concerning the limited quality and clinical variation of the evidence, the authors' conclusion should be interpreted with caution. 
The present study was designed to determine whether augmenting sertraline with prolonged exposure (PE) would result in greater improvement than continuation with sertraline alone. Outpatient men and women with chronic PTSD completed 10 weeks of open label sertraline and then were randomly assigned to five additional weeks of sertraline alone (n = 31) or sertraline plus 10 sessions of twice-weekly PE (n = 34). Results indicated that sertraline led to a significant reduction in PTSD severity after 10 weeks but was associated with no further reductions after five more weeks. Participants who received PE showed further reduction in PTSD severity. This augmentation effect was observed only for participants who showed a partial response to medication.
Of 141 women with twin pregnancies, 72 were randomly assigned to outpatient care and 69 to hospital admission between 26 and 30 weeks' gestation. There were no differences between the groups in the frequencies of major maternal complications in pregnancy and labour but more of those admitted to hospital than of the outpatient group had to be admitted after 30 weeks. There were no differences between the groups in the mean birthweights of the twins by birth order, or in their mean gestation at birth whether analysed by intention to treat or by the treatment given. 22 infants were delivered before 32 weeks' gestation in the inpatient group compared with 10 in the outpatient group. With the exception of small-for-dates infants, any trend towards greater morbidity or mortality was seen in the inpatient group. The policy of routine hospital admission of women with twin pregnancies from 26 weeks' gestation is not beneficial to mother or babies and should be abandoned.
The purpose of this double-blind placebo controlled study was to estimate how much the levodopa dosage can be reduced, when deprenyl is used, without worsening the disease and to see whether deprenyl can reduce the "off-periods". The trial included 40 patients of both sexes with at least 3 years history of Parkinson's disease who were undergoing stabilized levodopa therapy. The deprenyl dosage was 5 mg daily in the first 4 weeks. The levodopa dosage was reduced until there was demonstrable impairment. The trial demonstrates that with deprenyl the levodopa dosage can be reduced considerably without prejudicing the therapeutic outcome. Some patients showed improvement, and the "off-periods" were reduced in many cases.
This study was designed to assess the effectiveness of a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter in alleviating allergic respiratory symptoms. Thirty-two patients were studied who had symptomatic perennial rhinitis and/or asthma during the fall and winter months and had a positive skin test with house dust or house dust--mite extract. An ENVIRACAIRE room air cleaner was placed in the bedroom for 8 weeks. In a random manner, the active filter was used for 4 weeks and a blank filter for 4 weeks. There was an average 70% reduction in the particulate matter greater than or equal to 0.3 micron with the HEPA filter. In a double-blind design, results were assessed by analysis of the patients' symptom/medication scores and subjective evaluation. For the total study, there was no difference in the total symptom/medication scores or individual symptom scores during the placebo and active-filter periods. Analysis of the last 2 weeks of each filter period in which respiratory infection was absent demonstrated definite differences in total and individual symptoms, suggesting active-filter benefit. Patients' subjective responses also suggested benefit from the filter. The overall impression is that the HEPA filter can reduce allergic respiratory symptoms.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that studies differed in their design, quality and results but, overall, endoscopic ultrasound is superior to computed tomography for the detection of pancreatic cancer, although the optimal method for staging and determination of resectability remains undetermined. The reliability of these conclusions is restricted by methodological limitations in the selection and synthesis of studies in the review.
CRD SUMMARY: This generally well-conducted review assessed the efficacy of eccentric overload training in patients with chronic Achilles tendinopathy. The authors concluded that while the treatment appears promising, the magnitude of its effect could not be determined. This conclusion is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated non-drug treatments for patients with treatment-resistant epilepsy, and concluded that effective treatments are available, but all have disadvantages. Given the exclusion of several interventions, the paucity of good-quality data for those included, and the limitations of the review, the conclusions should be viewed with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review planned to evaluate which methods of re-evaluating refractory epilepsy can lead to improved patient outcomes. The authors addressed a different question, and concluded it was unclear whether blood prolactin levels can differentiate between epileptic and non-eplieptic seizures. The conclusion seems appropriate given that it was based on only five poor-quality trials and no review methodology was reported.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated the efficiency of functional appliances in enhancing mandibular growth in Class II patients. The authors concluded that most studies showed a clinically significant supplementary elongation in total mandibular length following treatment, and the Herbst appliance showed the greatest efficiency. Limitations of the review and the included studies suggest that this conclusion should be viewed with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review found that there is some evidence that manual vacuum aspiration is as effective and acceptable as electric vacuum aspiration (EVA) and that it may be safer than EVA. These conclusions are likely to be reliable, although the authors appropriately recommended some degree of caution in interpreting the results given the small sample sizes and methodological limitations of some of the included studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that measurement of troponin levels provides important prognostic information on risk of death during follow-up in patients who have undergone an elective percutaneous coronary intervention. The authors' conclusions are in line with the evidence presented, but should be treated with caution given that the review had various methodological and reporting limitations.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors conclude that live kidney donation is safe. However, it causes a small rise in urinary protein which increases over time, as well as an initial decrease in the glomerular filtration rate which does not worsen over time except when due to normal ageing. Despite limitations associated with poor-quality primary studies, these conclusions appear well supported by the data.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that psychosocial interventions may have significant effects beyond those of standard medical care on pain and other outcomes in adults with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. However, the review methods were unclear and there were problems with the analysis which may affect the reliability of the pooled effect sizes. The conclusions should therefore be interpreted cautiously.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of human recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) in cardiac surgery. The authors suggested that rFVIIa may reduce refractory post-operative bleeding while limited evidence supports rFVIIa in a prophylactic role. These conclusions have to be interpreted with extreme caution as they are based on small poor-quality studies.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found no statistically significant differences in implantation and pregnancy rates when supplementing recombinant follicle stimulating hormone with recombinant luteinising hormone for women undergoing ovarian stimulation for in vitro fertilisation. Overall, the potential for publication bias, the paucity of data, and the limited reporting of study methods suggest the conclusions should be interpreted with caution.  
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that rectal irrigation may have a role in the management of functional bowel disorders, but further research is needed to confirm this. The findings of this review should be interpreted with caution, given questions about the review methodology and the limitations of the evidence presented.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the efficacy of video-assisted and open surgery for the prevention of recurrent pneumothorax. The authors concluded that the video-assisted approach was associated with a four-fold higher rate of recurrent pneumothorax. This review was well-conducted and the conclusions appear reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This poorly described review concluded that there is some evidence that both in- and out-patient rehabilitation programmes can improve a variety of outcomes for patients with chronic fatigue or chronic fatigue syndrome, but the current evidence is subject to a number of methodological flaws. Given the differences between the studies and the poor quality of the data, a cautious interpretation of the evidence is advised.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that psychotherapy and pharmacology appear to be equally efficacious for depression in the short-term, but psychotherapy is associated with lower relapse rates at follow-up. The conclusions regarding the similar short-term efficacy of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy appear reliable, but limitations of the follow-up data suggest that the conclusions about longer term effects might not be definitive.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that clinical examination is able to detect relevant fractures of the pelvis, and that fractures that are missed tend not to require immediate treatment. Although these findings appear reliable, they should be interpreted with some degree of caution given the possibility of publication bias, differences between the studies and the failure to adequately assess study quality.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that rescue percutaneous coronary intervention is associated with improved clinical outcomes for ST-segment myocardial infarction patients after failed fibrinolytic therapy, but there are potential risks. No significant clinical improvements were shown for fibrinolytic therapy and it may be associated with increased harm. Overall, the conclusions appear reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that there is currently no consistent evidence that universal school-based programmes for the prevention of depression are effective in reducing depressive symptoms among children and adolescents in either the short or long term. Despite some limitations in the reporting of the review methods, overall, the review was well-conducted and these conclusions seem likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed intravenous corticosteroid (IVCS) therapy in patients with exacerbations of severe ulcerative colitis and predictors of response. The colectomy rate has remained stable and is not related to IVCS dosage or use of cyclosporine. Predictors of therapy failure were identified. Limitations in the
More than a half of the world's population are infected with one or more species of intestinal worms of which the nematodes Ascaris lumbricoides, Trichuris trichiura and the hookworms are the most common and important in terms of child health. This paper: (1) introduces the main species of intestinal worms with particular attention to intestinal nematodes; (2) examines how such worms may affect child growth and nutrition; (3) reviews the biological and epidemiological factors that influence the effects that worms can have on the growth and nutrition of children; (4) considers the many factors that can affect the impact of treatment with anthelmintic drugs; (5) presents the results of a meta-analysis of studies of the effect of treating worm infections on child growth and nutrition; (6) discusses the results in terms of what is reasonable to expect that deworming alone can achieve; (7) describes some important characteristics of an ideal study of the effects of deworming; and (8) comments on the implications for programmes of recommendations concerning mass deworming.

OBJECTIVES: A meta-analysis of the literature was performed in this article in order to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of 18F-FDG PET in suspected recurrent head and neck cancer.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review of the literature was performed using 1987 to 2007 MEDLINE and CANCERLIT databases, applying selection criteria to the studies found. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios, and odds ratio were calculated. The diagnostic accuracy was evaluated with ROC (receive-operating-characteristics) curves.
RESULTS: Nineteen articles were included in the meta-analysis. Sensitivity of 18F-FDG PET was 94 %, specificity 80 %, and the summary ROC curve showed a good trade-off between sensitivity and specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: 18F-FDG PET was useful in patients with suspected recurrence of head and neck cancer, showing a high sensitivity and intermediate-high specificity.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that gold, sulfasalazine, leflunomide and tumour necrosis factor inhibitors are effective in treating psoriatic arthritis compared to controls, but toxicity was greater. Given the methodological differences between included studies, and limitations in the reporting of the review, such as inconsistencies between the conclusions and statistical analysis, the reliability of the authors' conclusions is uncertain .
BACKGROUND: Endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR) repair has become a well-established technique in the treatment of elective abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) due to proven benefits in mortality, hospital stay and operation time compared to open repair. The aim of this study was to estimate the mortality rate from EVAR due to ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (RAAA).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: A systematic review and meta-analysis of all English language literature with information on mortality rates from EVAR for RAAA was conducted.
RESULTS: The pooled mortality rate from RAAA after EVAR across 31 studies concerning 982 patients was 24% (95% confidence interval (CI) 20-28%). The pooled morbidity from 21 studies was 44% (95% CI 33-55%). The average procedure time was 155.1 min, with an intra-operative blood loss of 523 ml and hospital stay of 10.1 days. There is evidence of publication bias suggesting the mortality rate may be under-estimated.
CONCLUSIONS: Mortality from EVAR for RAAA appears to be lower than that which is reported for open repair of RAAA. However, the high level of publication bias cannot be ignored and may actually indicate higher mortality rates.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that pre-operative chemotherapy plus surgery results in a significant survival benefit over surgery alone in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. The results of the review reflect the evidence reviewed, but the limitations of the included studies, and the exclusion of 5 eligible trials because of inadequate reporting of the outcome data, reduce the reliability of the conclusions. 
CRD SUMMARY: This reasonably well-conducted review assessed the efficacy of a routine invasive strategy compared with a selective invasive strategy on cardiovascular outcomes in patients with non-ST-segment elevated acute coronary syndrome. The authors' conclusion, that the current evidence does not clearly support the superiority of a routine invasive strategy over a selective invasive strategy in terms of the risk of mortality or nonfatal myocardial infarction, is likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that there is a lack of high-quality evidence supporting the use of lactulose and polyethylene glycol-3350 in the treatment of chronic constipation, although the data does support use in acute, episodic constipation. High-quality evidence supporting the use of tegaserod was found. Potential publication and language bias, limitations of the evidence, and differences between the studies mean that the authors' conclusions should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review found that none of the foetal urine tests investigated by the included studies showed sufficient accuracy to predict poor postnatal renal function. These conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy of standard directly observed treatment, short-course 6-month regimens of treatment in preventing the recurrence of tuberculosis. The authors concluded that few studies have assessed recurrence rates of such regimens under routine conditions. Poor reporting of review methodology means that this conclusion is probably, though not certainly, reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that misoprostol, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and possibly proton-pump inhibitors, reduce the risk of symptomatic ulcers; misoprostol is less well tolerated than proton-pump inhibitors or COX-2 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; and proton-pump inhibitors reduce the incidence of gastrointestinal symptoms, but not serious gastrointestinal complications, compared with COX-2 NSAIDs. The authors' conclusions seem reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that both cardiac resynchronisation therapy and implantable cardioverter defibrillator improve outcomes for selected patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction; combination of the two may provide further benefit. The review was well-conducted in many respects but, given the lack of a systematic validity assessment, poor reporting of study details and limitations of the primary studies, these conclusions may need to be viewed with some caution.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a distressing and functionally impairing disorder that can emerge as early as age 4. Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) for OCD in youth shows great promise for amelioration of symptoms and associated functional impairment. However, the empirical evidence base for the efficacy of CBT in youth has some significant limitations, particularly as related to treating the very young child with OCD. This report includes a quantitative review of existing child CBT studies to evaluate evidence for the efficacy of CBT for OCD. It identifies gaps in the literature that, when addressed, would enhance the understanding of effective treatment in pediatric OCD. Finally, it presents a proposed research agenda for addressing the unique concerns of the young child with OCD.

CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review examined the incidence of mucositis in patients treated with radiotherapy for head and neck cancer. The authors concluded that mucositis occurs frequently and severely, but that its overall impact on treatment outcomes has not been adequately investigated. The authors' conclusions are appropriate considering the paucity of evidence found for many relevant treatment outcomes.
In order to determine whether infertility of unexplained aetiology would respond to therapy with bromocriptine, 50 regularly ovulating infertile patients were studied in a double-blind placebo controlled trial. Following an observation cycle in which midluteal urinary oestrogen and pregnanediol excretion and late luteal serum PRL and hCG levels were determined, patients were randomly allocated to treatment with either bromocriptine or placebo for three cycles. Patients who did not conceive were then treated for three cycles with the alternative therapy. Eighteen women (36%) conceived, five during the observation cycle, four during treatment with bromocriptine, four whilst receiving placebo and five during the 12 month follow-up period. The pregnancy rate achieved in patients treated with bromocriptine was thus no better than that for the group as a whole.

CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that smoking cessation rates in cancer patients were not improved by various interventions compared with usual care. A combination of pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches may be more successful. Limitations in the review reporting and the lack of quality assessment make the reliability of the authors' conclusions uncertain.
An educational program for hospital pharmacists in and near Vermont is described and its impact on departmental clinical practice evaluated. Pharmacists were instructed by practitioners from a single institution in basic pharmacokinetics, practice guidelines for aminoglycoside therapy, and use of a computer program for aminoglycoside dosage determination. Participants completed a multiple-choice precourse test, a similar postcourse test, and a third test six months after class completion. Test scores were compared with those from a control group of pharmacists. Pharmacy directors from study group hospitals completed questionnaires measuring aminoglycoside clinical services before and six months after the program. Compared with the control group, participants scored higher on the postcourse tests. Results from the questionnaire indicate that the program affected clinical practice in almost all participating pharmacy departments. A consistent pharmacokinetic strategy for reviewing aminoglycoside dosages and evaluating serum aminoglycoside concentrations is now practiced in most Vermont hospitals. An educational program originating in one hospital can expand pharmacists' knowledge and influence departmental clinical practice throughout a region.

The relatively rapid growth of the direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing market in the last few years has led to increasing attention from both the scientific community and policy makers. One voice often missing in these debates, however, is that of the actual user of these genetic testing services. In order to gain a better picture of the motivations and expectations that propel individuals to purchase DTC genome-wide testing, we conducted an exploratory study based on users' personal stories. Through qualitative content analysis of users' personal stories found on Internet blogs and DTC genetic testing companies' websites, we identified five major sets of motivations and expectations towards DTC genome-wide testing. These themes are related to (1) health, (2) curiosity and fascination, (3) genealogy, (4) contributing to research, and (5) recreation. Obtaining such information can help us to understand how users consider genome-wide testing and forms the basis for further research.

Mothers' disclosure of their HIV serostatus to their noninfected young children and factors associated with disclosure were investigated among 135 families. Overall, 30% of the mothers had personally disclosed their serostatus to their children. Mothers who disclosed reported higher levels of social support in their lives than mothers who did not disclose. Children whose mothers had disclosed to them displayed lower levels of aggressiveness and negative self-esteem compared to children whose mother had not disclosed. These findings indicate that for this sample, no negative effects were observed among young children to whom mothers have personally disclosed their HIV serostatus.
OBJECTIVE: The District of Columbia General Hospital has a flexible sigmoidoscopy (FS) colorectal cancer screening program. We noted that this program was underused. The aim of this study was to determine whether education could improve use of a flexible sigmoidoscopy screening program in an inner city population.
METHODS: Patients undergoing screening FS 5 months before our educational initiative were compared to patients undergoing screening FS 5 months after implementation. A 1-month period was allowed for implementation. Procedure logs and GI charts were reviewed.
RESULTS: A total of 121 patients underwent FS screening during our study period. Of the patients, 97% were African-American; 58% were female; and the average age was 61 yr. A total of 50 patients underwent FS in the pre-education group, and 71 patients underwent FS after implementation of our educational initiative.
CONCLUSIONS: Education resulted in a 42% increase in FS screening in this inner city, predominantly African-American population. Larger scale educational initiatives should be conducted to determine whether these benefits can persist and can be improved upon.

A group of 120 patients with rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis volunteered to be subjects for this study of aerobic versus nonaerobic exercise. Patients were stratified by diagnosis and randomized into an exercise program of aerobic walking, aerobic aquatics, or nonaerobic range of motion (controls). The retention rate for the 12-week program was 83%. Exercise tolerance, disease-related measures, and self-reported health status were assessed. The aquatics and walking exercise groups showed significant improvement over the control group in aerobic capacity, 50-foot walking time, depression, anxiety, and physical activity after the 12-week exercise program. There were no significant between-group group differences in the change scores for flexibility, number of clinically active joints, duration of morning stiffness, or grip strength. Our findings document the feasibility and efficacy of conditioning exercise for people who have rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis.
CRD SUMMARY: This review reported that exenatide initiation was associated with significant improvements in clinically relevant outcomes. Because of a lack of quality assessment and limitations in the conduct and reporting of the review, the reliability and generalisability of the authors' conclusions are uncertain.
The purpose of this pilot study was to examine the immediate effects of a manual therapy technique called Inhibitive Distraction (ID) on active range of motion (AROM) for cervical flexion in patients with neck pain with or without concomitant headache. A secondary objective of this study was to see whether patient subgroups could be identified who might benefit more from ID by studying variables such as age, pain intensity, presence of headache, or pre-intervention AROM. We also looked at patients' ability to identify pre- to post-intervention changes in their ability to actively move through a range of motion. Forty subjects (mean age 34.7 years; range 16-48 years) referred to a physical therapy clinic due to discomfort in the neck region were randomly assigned to an experimental and a control group. We used the CROM goniometer to measure pre- and post-intervention cervical flexion AROM in the sagittal plane within a single treatment session. The between-group difference in AROM increase was not statistically significant at P<0.05 with a mean post-intervention increase in ROM of 2.4 degrees (SD 6.2 degrees ) for the experimental group and 1.2 degrees (SD 5.8 degrees ) for the placebo group. We were also unable to identify potential subgroups more likely to respond to ID, although a trend emerged for greater improvement in chronic patients with headaches, lower pain levels, and less pre-intervention AROM. In the experimental group and in both groups combined, subjects noting increased AROM indeed had a significantly greater increase in AROM than those subjects not noting improvement. In conclusion, this study did not confirm immediate effects of ID on cervical flexion AROM but did provide indications for potential subgroups likely to benefit from this technique. Recommendations are provided with regard to future research and clinical use of the technique studied.

To determine whether prophylactic treatment with recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO) and iron would reduce the need for blood transfusions, we randomly assigned 22 premature infants with gestational ages less than or equal to 32 weeks and birth weights less than or equal to 1.75 kg to receive rHuEPO, 400 IU/kg three times a week, plus iron, 20 mg/wk intravenously, from the second day of life (11 infants), or no rHuEPO and no iron (11 infants). The two groups had similar birth weights and clinical variables. The treated infants required fewer blood transfusions (0.8 +/- 1.5 vs 3.1 +/- 2.1; p = 0.01) and less volume of packed erythrocytes (14.2 +/- 25.9 vs 48.4 +/- 34.0 ml/kg; p = 0.02). The amounts of blood sampled were not different (19.5 +/- 21.1 vs 27.8 +/- 19.1 ml/kg; p = 0.35). Reticulocyte and hematocrit values were higher in the treated group (4.46% +/- 0.8% vs 1.49% +/- 1.1% (p = 0.0001) and 48.1% +/- 7.3% vs 43.8% +/- 4.7% (p = 0.004), respectively). No side effects of either rHuEPO or intravenously administered iron were noted. These data indicate that rHuEPO, in combination with iron supplementation, is effective in reducing the need for blood transfusions in the premature infant. More information is needed on dosage, timing, and iron and vitamin supplementation.

BACKGROUND: A meta-analysis of observational studies have suggested that planned home birth may be safe and with less interventions than planned hospital birth.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this review was to assess the effects of planned home birth compared to hospital birth on the rates of interventions, complications and morbidity as determined in randomized trials.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group's Trials Register (April 2006).
SELECTION CRITERIA: Controlled trials comparing planned hospital birth to planned home birth in selected women, assisted by an experienced home birth practitioner, and backed up by a modern hospital system in case transfer should be necessary.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Trial quality was assessed and data were extracted by one review author and checked by the other author. Study authors were contacted for additional information.
MAIN RESULTS: One study involving 11 women was included. The trial was of reasonable quality, but was too small to be able to draw conclusions.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is no strong evidence to favour either planned hospital birth or planned home birth for low-risk pregnant women.

Rapid, reliable and safe reestablishment of sinus rhythm is the major aim of pharmacologic treatment in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation. The mainstay of therapy in this arrhythmia has been quinidine. More recently, amiodarone was shown in non-comparative studies to be superior to class IA agents under certain conditions. In 40 patients with atrial fibrillation persisting for 4 weeks up to 2 years, the efficacy and safety of either quinidine and verapamil (days 1 to 3, quinidine 1,500 mg/day; days 4 to 6, quinidine 1,500 mg + verapamil 240 mg/day) or amiodarone therapy (days 1 to 3, amiodarone 1,200 mg/day intravenously; days 4 to 14, amiodarone 800 mg/day orally) were randomly examined. Responders continued on their effective medication for 3 months. Thereafter, all patients were treated with a fixed regimen of quinidine (480 mg/day) plus verapamil (240 mg/day) for up to 2 years. During atrial fibrillation, quinidine reduced mean ventricular cycle length by 40 ms (-5%), quinidine and verapamil increased mean cycle length by 57 ms (8%) and amiodarone by 192 ms (28%, p less than 0.01). In addition, quinidine and verapamil had a characteristic "rate-smoothing" effect on atrioventricular conduction during atrial fibrillation. The rhythm was converted to sinus rhythm after quinidine in 5 (25%) of 20 patients and after the combination of quinidine and verapamil in 11 (55%) of 20 patients. Amiodarone restored sinus rhythm in 12 (60%) of 20 patientsOverall, a shorter duration of atrial fibrillation (p < 0.05) and a smaller left atrial size (p < 0.01) were predictive of successful conversion of the arrhythmia.

In one patient on each regimen, medication was stopped because of side effects. Transient side effects occurred in 13 patients (33%), 5 receiving quinidine and verapamil and 8 receiving amiodarone. During long-term treatment, amiodarone could be safely replaced by quinidine and verapamil. Among 23 drug responders, atrial fibrillation recurred in 2 (1st 3 months), 5 (1st year) and 7 patients (2 years); side effects limited long-term therapy in 2 patients.

In summary, a similar efficacy rate of 50% to 60% to reestablish sinus rhythm favors the clinical situation (e.g., left ventricular function, fast ventricular rate) to select the drug of choice for a particular patient. When sinus rhythm is reestablished, quinidine and verapamil provide a safe and effective therapeutic regimen in 60% of patients over a 2-year follow-up period.
Regular urinary incontinence affects one in six adult women. However, for the majority, good continence services are difficult to access and few primary care-based assessment and treatment facilities are available. A large randomised trial of assessment and treatment in primary care using a trained nurse was conducted in Somerset in 1990. This report summarises the methods and results of the initial study and reports the four-year follow-up results. The results show that 70 percent of women will gain long lasting benefit. This model of service provision will also benefit secondary care specialist services by ensuring that patients are appropriately managed in primary care before any possible referral.

CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that carotid blowout is an infrequent but serious complication of re-irradiation for head and neck cancer and discussion of the risk should be undertaken for informed consent. Although there was potential bias in the review and no assessment of quality or clinical heterogeneity, the authors' cautious conclusions appear appropriate and are likely to be reliable.
In this prospective, randomized, controlled clinical study, 21 women underwent a second-look laparoscopy 2-11 weeks after standardized laparoscopic electrosurgical treatment for polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Following bilateral ovarian treatment, one ovary was randomly chosen to have Interceed applied to its surface using a specially designed applicator, with the other ovary serving as a control. Peri-adnexal adhesions of significant extent and severity developed in 57% of the women and 38% of the adnexa. The incidence of adhesions on the Interceed-treated side was 43%, while on the control side it was 33%. In addition, the extent and severity of the adhesions appeared to be similar on the Interceed-treated and control side. However, larger numbers would be required to determine statistically the effects of Interceed on de-novo adhesion formation after laparoscopic electrosurgical treatment of PCOS, as described here.

PURPOSE: The aim of this project was to design and evaluate a system that would produce tailored information for stroke patients and their carers, customised according to their informational needs, and facilitate communication between the patient and health professional.
METHOD: A human factors development approach was used to develop a computer system, which dynamically compiles stroke education booklets for patients and carers. Patients and carers are able to select the topics about which they wish to receive information, the amount of information they want, and the font size of the printed booklet. The system is designed so that the health professional interacts with it, thereby providing opportunities for communication between the health professional and patient/carer at a number of points in time.
RESULTS: Preliminary evaluation of the system by health professionals, patients and carers was positive. A randomised controlled trial that examines the effect of the system on patient and carer outcomes is underway.

The effect of an adjuvant mistletoe extract treatment was tested in a prospective, randomised controlled clinical trial involving 477 patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. The patients were stratified into two treatment groups that underwent surgery or surgery followed by radiotherapy and both groups were randomised for additional treatment with mistletoe extract. Patients treated with a mistletoe lectin-1 (ML-1) standardised mistletoe preparation had no lower risk of local/locoregional recurrences, distant metastases or second primaries. In the main analysis based on 202 patients treated with surgery and 275 patients treated with surgery and radiotherapy the adjusted hazard ratio for the disease-free survival (DFS) was 0.959 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.725-1.268). The 5-year survival rates of patients from the mistletoe group were no better than the survival rates of patients from the control group. Furthermore, no significant changes in the cellular immune reaction or in quality of life could be detected. We conclude that the used mistletoe preparation has no indication in the adjuvant treatment of patients with head and neck cancer.

The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness of different treatments in patients with alopecia totalis or universalis who did not respond to sensitizing therapies. Twenty-six patients, who had been receiving sensitizing therapy for at least 1 year without any response, were randomly assigned to receive the following treatments: topical 10% cyclosporine in oily solution (eight patients), PUVA (eight patients), and intravenous thymopentin (ten patients). None of them had any acceptable regrowth after at least 6 months of treatment. Our results suggest that other treatments are not useful in patients with 100% hair loss who fail to respond to sensitizing therapies.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that behavioural interventions (cognitive-behavioural therapy or nutrition and/or exercise interventions) effectively reduced weight gain associated with use of antipsychotic medication. The reliability of the authors' conclusions is uncertain due to a lack of study quality assessment, limits in the description of interventions and short follow-up times.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy was more effective than pharmacotherapy alone in attaining remission and preventing relapse in patients with major depressive disorder. Given the lack of clarity on the review processes and the variety between the included trials, these conclusions should be regarded as informative rather than definitive.
OBJECTIVE: To design a bundled case rate for Collaborative Care for Depression (CCD) that aligns incentives with evidence-based depression care in primary care.
DATA SOURCES: A clinical information system used by all care managers in a randomized controlled trial of CCD for older primary care patients.
STUDY DESIGN: We conducted an empirical investigation of factors accounting for variation in CCD resource use over time and across patients. CCD resource use at the patient-episode and patient-month levels was measured by number of care manager contacts and direct patient contact time and analyzed with count data (Poisson or negative binomial) models.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Episode-level resource use varies substantially with patient's time in the program. Monthly use declines sharply in the first 6 months regardless of treatment response or remission status, but it remains stable afterwards. An adjusted episode or monthly case rate design better matches payment with variation in resource use compared with a fixed design.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings lend support to an episode payment adjusted by number of months receiving CCD and a monthly payment adjusted by the ordinal month. Nonpayment tools including program certification and performance evaluation and reward systems are needed to fully align incentives.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that use of ephedrine and phenylephrine were equally effective for preventing maternal hypotension during caesarean section under spinal anaesthesia. Phenylephrine was superior to ephedrine for treating hypotension in women giving birth, shown by higher umbilical blood pH values. Given the limited number of included women and trials for most outcomes, these conclusions should be treated with caution.
BACKGROUND: Re-Engineering Systems for Primary Care Treatment of Depression (RESPECT-D) sought to improve patient outcomes by disseminating the 3-component model of depression management. The purpose of this study was to determine whether an integrated model of depression management continued to be used by primary care clinicians after the end of a randomized controlled trial (RCT).
METHODS: A descriptive evaluation was conducted at 2 time points. First, during a 12-month period after the end of the RESPECT-D RCT when referrals to care management were determined for each of the 5 participating health care organizations. Second, 3 years after the RCT ended, when clinicians were surveyed about use of the 3-component model.
RESULTS: Three organizations continued to support the model with minimal modification. One made a major modification to it and one did not continue to support it. In the 12 months after the RCT, 1039 care management referrals were made. Seventy-one percent of RCT clinicians (n=92) completed the follow-up survey. Of these, 87% reported using the Patient Health Questionnaire-9; 58.9% reported availability of care management and 45.1% reported availability of informal psychiatry consultation.
CONCLUSION: Practical clinical interventions can be sustained in primary care practice after the completion of an RCT. Additional resources may be needed to sustain and spread the program.

CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review examined the effect of targeting low and high levels of haemoglobin when treating patients with anaemia resulting from chronic kidney disease with erythropoietin. The authors concluded that targeting a high haemoglobin level increases patient overall mortality. These conclusions are likely to be reliable.
Thirty patients suffering from peripheral vascular disease (stage-II according to Fontaine) were included in a double-blind study aimed at assessing the efficacy of a high-dose glycosaminoglycan (GAG) (Sulodexide) both in terms of laboratory parameters, such as lipid metabolism and blood coagulation components, and instrumental procedures (strain-gauge plethysmography). Compared with the fifteen control patients (treated with placebo), the fifteen patients treated with Sulodexide showed a significant decrease in blood triglycerides and fibrinogen as well as a significantly increased HDL-cholesterol, and positive instrumental changes: at the end of treatment Peak and Rest Flow values--and consequently also Winsor's index--were significantly increased only in patients treated with Sulodexide.

The growing body of research into treatment efficacy with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) has, by-and-large, been limited to evaluating treatment components or comparing a specific treatment against wait-list controls. This has led to two forms of treatment, Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) and Cognitive-Behavior Therapy (CBT), vying for supremacy without a controlled study actually comparing them. The present research compared EMDR and a CBT variant (Trauma Treatment Protocol; TTP) in the treatment of PTSD, via a controlled clinical study using therapists trained in both procedures. It was found that TTP was both statistically and clinically more effective in reducing pathology related to PTSD and that this superiority was maintained and, in fact, became more evident by 3-month follow-up. These results are discussed in terms of past research. Directions for future research are suggested.

A placebo-controlled, double-blind study of 63 inpatients with major affective disorder was performed to compare the safety and efficacy of fluvoxamine and imipramine. Results indicate that fluvoxamine and imipramine are superior to placebo and demonstrate a trend toward superiority of fluvoxamine over imipramine. Fluvoxamine was generally well tolerated in most patients.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial involving 107 men receiving bicalutamide ('Casodex') 150 mg/day therapy following radical therapy for prostate cancer assessed tamoxifen ('Nolvadex') 20 mg/day and anastrozole ('Arimidex') 1 mg/day for the prophylaxis and treatment of gynecomastia/breast pain. Tamoxifen, but not anastrozole, significantly reduced the incidence of gynecomastia/breast pain when used prophylactically and therapeutically. Serum testosterone levels increased with tamoxifen relative to placebo but prostate-specific antigen levels declined in all treatment groups. Further studies are needed to define the optimum tamoxifen dose and to assess any impact on cancer control. The use of tamoxifen in this setting remains to be investigated.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of interferon prophylaxis against viral infections was conducted in renal-transplant recipients receiving standard immunosuprressive therapy with or without antithymocyte globulin. Interferon was administered for six weeks, beginning on the day of transplantation. Cytomegalovirus excretion began earlier and viremia was more frequent in placebo-treated than in interferon-treated patients. Cytomegalovirus viremia correlated with clinical syndromes was more frequent in recipients of antithymocyte globulin. In contrast, neither interferon nor antithymocyte globulin altered excretion of herpes simplex virus. Reversible leukopenia and thrombocytopenia occurred in seven interferon recipients. Patient and graft survival were comparable in interferon and placebo groups. There preliminary results suggest that a six-week course of prophylactic interferon delays shedding of cytomegalovirus and decreases the incidence of viremia after transplantation. In contrast, antithymocyte globulin appears to increase the severity of infection from cytomegalovirus among these patients.

A randomized controlled trial was undertaken to measure effects of exercise on: 1) the progression of cognitive symptoms related to dementia using the Clock- Drawing test Shulman et al. 1993); and 2) disability using the Revised Elderly Persons Disabilities Scale (REPDS; Fleming and Bowles 1993). Data was analysed from 75 nursing home residents with dementia who were randomly assigned to one experimental group and two control groups. Group 1 (control) received no intervention, Group 2 (control) received a social visit equivalent in duration and frequency as those undertaking the exercise program in the experimental group, Group 3. A specifically designed, frail aged appropriate, twelve week exercise program was undertaken by the those in the experimental group three times per week, each session lasted for thirty minutes. The findings from: 1) the clock drawing test showed that exercise may slow the rate of progression of the cognitive symptoms related to dementia; and 2) the REPDS showed that exercise slowed and reversed disability in some of the activities of daily living.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that testosterone replacement therapy may have an antidepressant effect, especially for patients who also have hypogonadism or HIV infection. Limitations in the review methods and the evidence base suggest that the conclusions should be treated with caution. The conclusions are unlikely to be applicable to the general population of patients with depression.
CRD SUMMARY: This well-conducted review concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine whether omentoplasty should be used to reduce anastomotic leakage after colorectal resection. This conclusion is likely to be reliable.
The effect on fetal and maternal outcome in gestational exercise in a recreational athlete was investigated in a 2 1/2-year prospective study. A training effect in a pregnant subject engaged in aerobic exercise was also determined. One hundred forty-one low-risk pregnant subjects had their aerobic capacity tested during the first trimester, during the third trimester, and post partum. Predicted maximum oxygen consumption values were determined by using standard Bruce treadmill protocol during the first and third tests and the Astrand protocol for submaximal testing on a bicycle ergometer during the third trimester. Exercise prescriptions were given. The primiparous and multiparous subjects were randomized into control and exercise groups, differing only in the frequency of aerobic exercise. The results showed that exercise had no associated increase in neonatal morbidity and obstetric complications. All subjects improved or maintained their level of aerobic fitness. The exercisers showed a significant training effect. The disparity in the second test's results may suggest that the physiologic characteristics of pregnancy masked the aerobic improvement.

BACKGROUND: The main objective in the treatment of schizophrenia should be to optimize individual patient functioning and quality of life. Little is known about the possible relationship of concurrent mood symptoms and quality of life. We hypothesized that the quality of life for people with schizophrenia would be inversely related to the severity of concurrent mood disruption.
METHOD: We conducted a post hoc analysis of an international, multicenter, double-blind, 28-week study of 339 patients who met DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia, schizophreniform, or schizoaffective disorder and were randomized to treatment with either olanzapine or risperidone. Quality of life data were collected at baseline, 8, 16, 24, and 28 weeks or at early discontinuation; Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) data were collected at each visit (weekly to week 8 and monthly thereafter). Correlations were calculated between changes in quality of life (quality of life scale [QLS] total and subscales) and PANSS mood score. Regression models were used to determine the proportion of variability in the QLS total and subscores accounted for by changes in PANSS positive, PANSS negative, and PANSS mood scores. Finally, path analysis was performed to determine the mechanisms used by the PANSS mood scores to affect the QLS total and subscores.
RESULTS: Olanzapine demonstrated a significantly greater therapeutic effect on the PANSS mood item than risperidone did. However, mood improvements with either therapy demonstrated correlations of PANSS mood on the QLS total and subscores which were statistically significant, with the strongest correlation against the interpersonal relations (QLS-IPR) subscore. The path analysis results indicate that the PANSS mood item's most significant path in affecting the QLS total and QLS-IPR is direct.
CONCLUSION: Changes in the quality of life of schizophrenic patients is inversely related to changes in the concurrent mood disruption. Early therapeutic interventions directed at a broader constellation of schizophrenic symptomatology, including mood, may be helpful in improving an individual patient's quality of life. The possible relative advantages of introducing novel antipsychotic agents earlier in the course of illness for restoration of individual quality of life merit further investigation.

We studied the effects of a silicone gel bandage that was worn for at least 12 hours daily on the resolution of hypertrophic burn scar. In a second cohort, the prevention of hypertrophic scar formation in fresh surgical incisions by this bandage was also evaluated. In 19 patients with hypertrophic burn scars, elasticity of the scars was quantitated serially with the use of an elastometer. An adjacent or mirror-image hypertrophic burn scar served as a control. Scar elasticity was increased after both 1 and 2 months compared with that in controls. There was corresponding improvement clinically that persisted for at least 6 months. In the other cohort, scar volume changes in 21 surgical incisions were measured before and after 1 and 2 months. Gel-treated incisions gained less volume than control incisions after both intervals. Clinical assessment corroborated this quantitative demonstration of a decrement in scar volume. We concluded that topical silicone gel is efficacious, both in the prevention and in the treatment of hypertrophic scar.

A prospective, controlled clinical trial was undertaken to assess the efficacy and safety of two types of silicone gel, Silastic Gel Sheeting (SGS) and Cica-Care (CC), in the management of hypertrophic scars. Forty-two patients were randomly assigned to SGS and CC groups and their hypertrophic scars were divided into treated and control areas. Extensometric measurements were made at monthly intervals for 6 months and significant improvement of the treated areas relative to the control areas was observed. The two gels were not significantly different in efficacy or safety, but CC, being more adhesive and more comfortable than SGS, has advantages in ease of use and patient acceptability.

CONTEXT: Although the first commercial polyurethane condom was approved for use several years ago, no U.S. clinical trial has compared its performance to that of the latex condom.
METHODS: In a masked crossover study, 360 couples were randomized to use three polyurethane condoms and three latex condoms. After each use, couples recorded condom breaks, condom slips and other aspects of performance. At completion of the study, couples compared the sensitivity, ease of use, fit and lubrication of the two types of condoms.
RESULTS: The clinical breakage rate of the polyurethane condom was 7.2%, compared with 1.1% for the latex condom (relative risk of 6.6, 95% confidence interval of 3.5-12.3). The complete slippage rate (combining incidents during intercourse and withdrawal) of the polyurethane condom was 3.6%, compared with 0.6% for the latex condom (relative risk of 6.0, 95% confidence interval of 2.6-14.2). Most male users preferred the sensitivity provided by the polyurethane condom to that of the latex condom.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical breakage rate of the polyurethane condom is significantly higher than that of the latex condom. However, nearly half of the users preferred the polyurethane condom, which provides an option for couples who have rejected conventional condoms or who cannot use latex products.

From 5/93 up to 12/93 a prospective randomized trial was performed. 102 patients with unilateral primary inguinal hernias were included. In 48 patients a Shouldice repair and in 54 patients a laparoscopic TAPP procedure was performed. The laparoscopic method is described. There were significantly less pain and quicker mobility in the laparoscopic group. In addition a shorter period of disability of work was seen (21 vs. 38 days) in the same group. The morbidity of the procedures was as low in the Shouldice as in the laparoscopic group. There was a regular control of all patients. The current follow-up period is 16 months (13-21) in median. In both groups there were no recurrences up to now. The efficiency of laparoscopic hernia repair is discussed.

OBJECTIVE: We compared the use of aspirin alone with combined therapy (prednisone plus aspirin) in antiphospholipid antibody-positive obstetric patients with prior adverse pregnancy outcome.
STUDY DESIGN: Thirty-nine patients meeting specific laboratory and clinical inclusion criteria were randomized to receive either combined therapy (prednisone plus low-dose aspirin, n = 17) or aspirin alone (n = 22). The daily aspirin dose was 81 mg; prednisone was begun at 20 mg/day and increased or decreased on the basis of observed changes in serial antibody levels. Perinatal outcomes were compared between groups. Evaluation of treatment-related maternal complications and serial antibody titers was also accomplished.
RESULTS: Thirty-four randomized subjects were evaluable (prednisone plus low-dose aspirin, n = 12 vs aspirin only, n = 22); no perinatal losses were observed in the study cohort. Preterm delivery was experienced by significantly more patients receiving prednisone plus low-dose aspirin than aspirin only (8/12 vs 3/22, respectively; p = 0.003), and prednisone exposure appeared to be an independent risk factor for preterm birth.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of prednisone therapy in conjunction with low-dose aspirin does not appear to improve outcome and may provoke obstetric complications in antiphospholipid antibody-positive patients.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of the atypical antipsychotics amisulpride and olanzapine in the treatment of acute psychotic exacerbations of schizophrenia.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A multinational, double-blind randomised clinical trial.
PATIENTS AND TREATMENT: Three hundred and seventy-seven patients with predominantly positive symptomatology were treated for six months with either amisulpride (200-800 mg/d) or olanzapine (5-20 mg/d).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Short-term results were analysed after two months of treatment. The primary efficacy measure was the change of score on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS). Other measures of efficacy and safety were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Psychotic symptoms, as measured on the BPRS score, improved with both treatments, amisulpride being equivalent to olanzapine. All BPRS factor scores, as well as depressive symptoms, improved to a similar extent with both treatments. Less than five per cent of patients withdrew for adverse events, and there was no evidence for the emergence of extrapyramidal symptoms with either treatment. Statistically significant greater weight gain (2.7 +/- 3.9 kg) was observed during the study in the olanzapine group, compared with the amisulpride group (0.9 +/- 3.2 kg, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Amisulpride and olanzapine show equivalent efficacy at 2 months in the treatment of acute psychotic exacerbations of schizophrenia. Amisulpride offers a significant advantage in preserving body weight.

There is current disagreement over whether men and women respond differently to typical or atypical antipsychotic medications. This study reanalyzed a large international clinical trial of olanzapine (Olz) compared with haloperidol (Hal) to test for sex differences in treatment response, controlling for illness chronicity and menopausal status. We hypothesized that women would show a greater response to either medication than men, particularly among first admission, premenopausal women. DSM-III-R schizophrenia inpatients (700 women and 1295 men) were randomly assigned to a 6-week trial of Olz vs. Hal. Longitudinal random effect models were used to test for interactions of sex with medication, chronicity and menopausal status on treatment response. Findings showed that women on olanzapine had a greater drop in overall symptomatology by week 4 than any other group, and their level of symptomatology remained lower throughout the 6-week trial. The sex differences in treatment response in olanzapine compared with haloperidol were, in part, dependent on chronicity and, in women, menopausal status. That is, first episode women on haloperidol exhibited an increase in symptomatology over the 6-week trial compared to their male counterparts, while multiply hospitalized women had a better treatment response on haloperidol than their male counterparts. Women on olanzapine had a significantly better treatment response than men, regardless of chronicity. Finally, premenopausal women had a significantly better treatment response than postmenopausal women, regardless of treatment and chronicity.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of antipsychotic monotherapy in schizoaffective disorder is limited, and further constrained by safety concerns.
AIMS: We aimed to compare the efficacy, tolerability and safety profile of the new pharmaceutical, olanzapine, with haloperidol.
METHOD: Data were assessed from 300 DSM-III-R schizoaffective subjects from a larger double-blind prospective international study. Subjects were randomly allocated to six weeks of olanzapine (5-20 mg) or haloperidol (5-20 mg) treatment; responders were followed for up to one year of double-blind, long-term maintenance therapy.
RESULTS: Olanzapine-treated patients achieved a statistically significant greater improvement than haloperidol treated patients on overall measures of efficacy, including clinical response. Significantly fewer olanzapine patients left the study early, and fewer adverse events were observed among those receiving olanzapine. During maintenance, olanzapine-treated patients continued to experience additional improvement, with fewer EPS but more weight gain than those on haloperidol.
CONCLUSIONS: Olanzapine demonstrated substantial advantages over the conventional antipsychotic haloperidol in the management of schizoaffective disorder.

We utilize data from a large, double-blind, randomized clinical trial of treatment for schizophrenia to compare the effect of therapy with the second generation antipsychotic olanzapine versus therapy with the conventional agent haloperidol on the perceived functioning and well-being of patients over 1 year as measured by the Medical Outcome Study Short Form (SF-36). We also compare the total cost of care between the treatment groups over 1 year and combine cost and functional outcomes information to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness of both therapies in this sample. Over 1 year of therapy, patients receiving olanzapine experienced a mean of 5.75 units greater improvement than did haloperidol-treated patients on the physical health and functioning factor of the SF-36 and 1.66 units greater improvement on the mental health and functioning factor. The mean annual total cost of care, including the cost of medication therapies, was $9386.87 less for olanzapine-treated patients than for haloperidol-treated patients. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for olanzapine versus haloperidol treatment indicated a savings of $1632.50 per unit of improvement in the SF-36 physical health and functioning score and a savings of $5654.74 per unit of improvement in the mental health and functioning composite. Improvements in perceived health and functioning were also associated with reduction in hospital costs in the full sample. These findings suggest that patient-centered measures of functioning such as the SF-36 are an important component of the evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of novel treatments for schizophrenia.

OBJECTIVES: to review the current status of lower limb MRA.
DESIGN: a literature review based predominantly on a MEDLINE database search of English-language publications from January 1991 to October 2000.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: twenty-eight articles, concerning non-enhanced MRA (13), gadolinium-enhanced MRA (14) or both (1), met the predefined requirement for quality. Results gadolinium-enhanced MRA (CE-MRA) seems to be more accurate, quicker and associated with fewer problems than non-enhanced (TOF) MRA. TOF-MRA has a sensitivity and specificity of 93% (range 64-100%) and 88% (range 57-100%) respectively, and CE-MRA presents values of 96% (range 71-100%) and 96% (63-100%), respectively, using conventional arteriography as the gold standard. Some articles report a substantial incidence of runoff vessels suitable for distal bypass visible on MRA but invisible on conventional arteriography. Gadolinium contrast is given intravenously and is generally well tolerated and has no known nephrotoxicity.
CONCLUSION: CE-MRA is accurate compared to conventional arteriography, has the potential to increase the limb salvage rate for selected patients, is non-invasive and well tolerated.

Adolescent unmedicated ADHD males and age- and sex-matched normal control subjects were examined simultaneously using EEG and EDA measures in a resting eyes-open condition. ADHD adolescents showed increased absolute and relative Theta and Alpha1 activity, reduced relative Beta activity, reduced skin conductance level (SCL) and a reduced number of non-specific skin conductance responses (NS.SCRs) compared with the control subjects. Our findings indicate the continuation of increased slow wave activity in ADHD adolescents and the presence of a state of autonomic hypoarousal in this clinical group.

This systematic review demonstrates that, in patients sustaining minor head injury with a history of loss of consciousness or amnesia, the proportion who subsequently have positive CT scans is not negligible. Published clinical prediction rules for selecting patients for subsequent CT examination are associated with a trade-off between sensitivity and specificity; therefore, a prediction rule with high sensitivity is expected to have relatively low specificity. Separate evaluation of the literature is required to determine the significance of positive and negative CT scans with respect to patient outcome.

Thirty-four adolescents aged 11 to 19 at the time of gastric surgery for obesity were interviewed an average of 6 years postoperatively. Patients' preoperative body mass index averaged 47; at follow-up, their body mass index averaged 32. Two thirds of the patients weighed within 9 kg of their lowest postsurgical weight at the time of follow-up; three had had additional obesity surgery. Patients reported excellent psychosocial adjustment, including improved self-esteem, social relationships, and appearance. No patient was unemployed. Patients reported poor compliance with exercise and dietary instructions. More seriously, only four patients reported taking vitamin B12, multivitamin supplements, and calcium as directed. The need for long-term patient commitment and monitoring is discussed.

INTRODUCTION: Nevirapine administered as a single dose each to the mother and child within 72 h after birth is used to prevent vertical transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) under the prevention of parent to child transmission of HIV program (PPTCT). The efficacy of nevirapine in this regard has been proved beyond doubt, but there are unresolved questions about its safety. Hence, the primary objective of this study was to evaluate the safety of this regime.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HIV-positive pregnant women who consented to participate in the study received a single oral dose of 200 mg nevirapine at the onset of labor followed by administration of 2 mg/kg of nevirapine syrup to the newborn within 72 h of birth. Both mother and child were followed up for 1 week postpartum to note the occurrence of any adverse reactions.
RESULTS: The mother and child followed up for 1 week postpartum did not show any serious adverse reactions in the present study. Mothers reported adverse reactions like nausea, vomiting, and headache which were self-limiting and did not require any intervention.
CONCLUSION: The present study substantiates the safety of nevirapine.

Tonsillectomy is one of the most common operations performed in the pediatric age group. Previous literature on morbidity in tonsillectomy has dealt predominantly with postoperative hemorrhage. Children undergoing tonsillectomy were divided in a prospective and random fashion into eight study groups to evaluate postoperative morbidity as it relates to the surgical technique used (electrocautery, dissection, KTP laser), methods of hemostasis (electrocautery, suture ligature), and the use of postoperative antibiotics. A total of 80 children were evaluated. Using the parameters of morbidity as defined in this study, blunt dissection tonsillectomy using suture ligatures for hemostasis, without postoperative antibiotics was found to result in the least morbidity in the pediatric age group.
Recent studies suggest that infant behavior and psychological test performance are impaired by iron deficiency and may be improved by iron. Comparable studies have not been performed in older populations. Young women early in pregnancy whose nutritional intake may be impaired by poverty constitute a high-risk population. Women aged 14-24 years coming for prenatal care at or before 16 weeks gestation whose hematocrits were greater than or equal to 31% were randomized in a double-blind trial to receive vitamins supplemented with iron (experimental group) or vitamins alone (controls). Hematologic status and tests of short-term memory and attention span were assessed at entry and conclusion of the one-month treatment period. The experimental group showed significant improvement on the most sensitive measure of short-term memory and three subtests. On comparison of the change between initial and final scores, the experimental group showed significant or borderline greater improvement than controls on three tests. These results indicated a beneficial effect of iron therapy on psychometric test-score performance.

Double Blind comparative trial of a new dibenzodiazepine derivative Clozapine (Leponex) with Chlorpromazine was conducted in the treatment of acute schizophrenic illness over a 6 week period. Factor Analysis of ratings in 9 matched pairs indicates that Clozapine, at 300 mg. per day, is comparable in efficacy to Chlorpromazine in all factors except "Irritability" for which Clozapine appears to be superior. Illness severity and Global Change ratings in all patients showed that Clozapine is more effective in producting a shift towards improvement at the end of 6 weeks. Major side effects reported in Clozapine confirmed sedation and hypersalivation as consistent problems and presence of rigidity and tremor (extra-pyramidal) being at variance with other studies.

From October 2002 to February 2003, we conducted semi-structured interviews on knowledge of HIV, antiretroviral treatment, and willingness to participate in voluntary counselling and testing and HAART with 54 consenting patients attending a tuberculosis (TB) clinic in Durban, South Africa. 74% of patients interviewed reported not knowing anything about antiretroviral treatment (HAART). Knowledge of antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) was restricted to use in preventing mother to child HIV transmission (MTCT). 57.4% of the patients reported having an HIV test in the past, but less than 10% were aware of their current HIV status. Patients who did not know their current HIV status expressed fear and hesitation about testing HIV positive. However, 91% of the patients expressed willingness to participate in HIV treatment given the opportunity. The findings from this study indicate that knowledge of HIV treatment is limited. As access to HAART is expanded, information about HIV treatment options will need to be disseminated. TB centres may present unique opportunities for disseminating HIV prevention, care, and treatment options.

PURPOSE: This article compares a traditional ambulatory clinic in an academic medical center with a telemedicine clinic. The telemedicine clinic is a joint project of the UTMB Telehealth Center and the Epilepsy Foundation of Southeast Texas, with partial funding for clinical operations provided by the Texas Department of Health.
METHODS: Data were collected on all the patients (n = 155) in both clinics for 3 months in 2004. In addition to demographic information, outcome data (number of seizures, hospitalizations, and emergency room visits) were gathered. Medication compliance also was collected by using self-report and medication levels.
RESULTS: Outcome variables were subjected to t test and chi(2) analysis. No significant differences were found in any of the demographic data or outcome measures between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Telemedicine is an acceptable alternative to in-person clinics for the provision of care to adults with epilepsy. Because telemedicine programs are designed to bring medical care closer to where patients live, these clinics provide an excellent alternative to provide consistent care in rural and geographically isolated areas. Additional studies are needed to investigate the potential costs associated with telemedicine as well as the potential for cost savings over time as patients are more able to access care and therefore may be more likely to seek the needed routine care and follow-up.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the evidence for the association between different biochemical markers at admission and mortality through a meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed-, Embase-, Cochran Library and the Web of Knowledge were searched for cohort studies.
STUDY SELECTION: Eligible studies were observational studies with a study population larger than 150 subjects, a mean age above 60 years and a study duration below 730 days.
DATA EXTRACTION: Characteristics of studies and outcomes of all-cause mortality were extracted from the retrieved articles. Data were pooled across studies for the individual biomarker using random- or fixed-effect analysis.
DATA SYNTHESIS: 15 eligible studies of 5 different markers on mortality were studied. The following markers were found to be of prognostic value on mortality in hip fracture patients: low haemoglobin (odds ratio, 2.78; 95% confidence interval, 2.17-3.55; P<0.00001, 3148 subjects included), low total lymphocyte count, TLC (odds ratio, 2.60; 95% confidence interval, 1.61-4.20; P<0.00001, 1689 subjects included), low albumin (odds ratio, 1.83; 95% confidence interval, 1.31-2.56; P=0.0004, 1680 subjects included), low albumin/low TLC (odds ratio, 3.00; 95% confidence interval, 1.81-4.99; P<0.0001, 704 subjects included), low albumin/high TLC (odds ratio, 3.39; 95% confidence interval, 1.83-6.29; P=0.0001, 704 subjects included), high creatinine (odds ratio, 1.58; 95% confidence interval, 1.25-1.99; P=0.0001, 3761 subjects included), and high PTH (odds ratio, 15.43; 95% confidence interval, 3.60-66.14; P=0.0002, 525 subjects included).
CONCLUSION: Biochemical markers at admission are valid predictors of mortality in hip fracture patients.

This is the second part of a two-part article that presents findings from a staff nurse survey one year after the implementation of primary nursing on four medical and surgical pilot units in a tertiary teaching hospital. The introduction of primary nursing was one phase of a project to develop theory-based nursing practice within the institution. The researchers hoped that obtaining the staff nurse perspective on the change to primary nursing would provide evaluative information and suggestions to provide additional support in the project. Role theory (Hardy, 1978) provides the theoretical framework for this study. While the previous article discussed issues related to the change process, this article focuses on evaluation of role transitions.

The effect of Aloe vera juice in combination with glibenclamide was investigated in diabetic patients. There was no response to glibenclamide alone but Aloe vera juice significantly reduced levels of fasting blood glucose within two weeks and of triglycerides within four weeks. It showed no effect on cholesterol levels and had no toxic effects on kidney or liver function as assessed by blood chemistry. The results support the use of Aloe vera in the treatment of diabetes.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of the topical use of benzydamine hydrochloride 0.15% oral mouthwashes in the control of burning mouth syndrome symptoms.
STUDY DESIGN: In this double-blind, randomized, longitudinal investigation, each of 30 patients with burning mouth syndrome was assigned to one of 3 management modalities. Those in group A received an oral rinse solution of benzydamine hydrochloride 0.15% 3 times a day for 4 weeks, those in group B received a placebo 3 times a day for 4 weeks, and those in group C did not receive any kind of treatment. A visual analog scale was used for evaluation of the symptoms; a Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance exact test was performed on the resulting data.
RESULTS: The findings of this investigation failed to reveal significant differences among the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical application of benzydamine hydrochloride oral rinses in the treatment of patients with burning mouth syndrome did not demonstrate significative efficacy in comparison with use of a placebo solution.

In a double-blind study of 38 chronic schizophrenic in-patients, haloperidol decanoate was compared with fluphenazine decanoate as maintenance therapy over 60 weeks. Both drugs were given by injection at 4-week intervals. Haloperidol and fluphenazine were assumed to be equipotent; the mean starting dose of the former was 127 mg and of the latter 106 mg. The number of withdrawals over 60 weeks was similar in both groups but relapses, strictly defined, were significantly more frequent in the haloperidol group. When patients were switched to haloperidol, Parkinsonism diminished more quickly than in the fluphenazine group, but after 60 weeks there was no difference in severity in the two drug groups. The higher relapse rate and the quicker reduction in Parkinsonism in the haloperidol group might be due to a misjudgement in equivalent doses of the two drugs. Plasma haloperidol steady state levels were reached in most patients by 8-12 weeks. Plasma neuroleptic and prolactin levels, week-by-week systemic drug availability and Parkinsonism showed less variation between injections with haloperidol than with fluphenazine.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that there was no survival benefit for coronary artery bypass grafting over percutaneous coronary artery intervention five years after initial procedure. Major adverse cardiovascular events and repeat revascularisation were higher after percutaneous coronary artery intervention. The conclusions reflected the evidence, but without validity assessment and reporting on other review processes the reliability of the conclusions is unclear.
The insulin resistance syndrome has recently been implicated in the etiology of coronary heart disease, with a possible metabolic defect at the level of the adipocyte. We report the effects of a low- versus high-glycemic-index (LGI and HGI, respectively) diet on insulin and glucose response as assessed by oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in isolated adipocytes in a group of 32 patients with advanced coronary heart disease. The area under the insulin curve following OGTT was significantly reduced after 4 weeks in the LGI group (P < .03), but not in the HGI group. Insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in isolated adipocytes harvested from a presternal fat biopsy was significantly greater following the LGI diet (P < .05). This study demonstrates that simple short-term dietary measures can improve insulin sensitivity in patients with coronary heart disease.

Pomeroy tubal ligation is a widely-used method for surgical female sterilization. A laparoscopic technique of Pomeroy tubal ligation using endoloop sutures is compared with the conventional technique of Pomeroy tubal ligation by minilaparotomy. Forty-four women requiring sterilization were randomly selected for either laparoscopy (n = 24) or minilaparotomy (n = 20). Mean operative time in the laparoscopy group (18.90 +/- 5.56 with a range of 12-35 minutes) was not significantly different from that in the minilaparotomy (23.12 +/- 8.24 with a range of 15-45 minutes) group. In all women, tubal specimens confirmed tubal histology. Both laparoscopy and minilaparotomy procedures may be performed for Pomeroy tubal ligation with minor morbidity. In clinics with appropriate conditions, Pomeroy tubal ligation by laparoscopy may be preferable to minilaparotomy.

Circadian profiles of melatonin in serum and serotonin in blood were assessed before and after 7 days of artificial light treatment in 30 patients with non-seasonal depression and 12 healthy subjects. Patients and volunteers were allocated at random to either dim (50 lux) or bright light (2,500 lux) for 2 hours daily. The study has not been completed yet. Preliminary findings are presented here. Light treatment modifies marginally the circadian melatonin profiles of depressed patients and healthy subjects; however, it augments blood serotonin throughout the day. This increase is seen in all patients and healthy subjects after bright as well as dim light. These results suggest that the influence of light is more pronounced on serotonin than melatonin metabolism.

The treatment of phytobezoar is empiric. The various therapeutic choices include dietary modifications, prokinetic drugs, gastric lavage, enzymatic dissolution, endoscopic treatment, and surgery. We present two cases of phytobezoar with successful outcome after Coca-Cola administration.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the risk of cerebral vein thrombosis (CVT) associated with oral contraceptive (OC) use. The authors concluded that OC users are at increased risk of CVT, particularly those with a pre-existing prothrombotic condition. However, these findings were based on a diverse group of studies with inherent biases, suggesting that the authors' findings should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review evaluated conservative non-surgical management of Piriformis Syndrome. The authors' conclusions appeared to be that Botox injections may be an effective treatment for Piriformis Syndrome and that further research is recommended. This was a poorly reported review, with methodological weaknesses identified within a very limited evidence base. The extent to which the authors' conclusions are reliable is unclear.
To determine the most useful clinical symptoms and signs for detection of pneumonia in children, we carried out a prospective clinical study at Queen Alia Hospital, Amman, on 147 children admitted between August 2002 and January 2003 with clinical pneumonia. All the children had chest X-rays, which were read by the same radiologist. The most sensitive and specific signs and symptoms for prediction of pneumonia were coughing, tachypnoea (respiratory rate > 50/min) and chest wall indrawing. We found that presence of tachypnoea and lower chest wall indrawing can detect most cases of pneumonia. If all clinical signs are negative, chest X-ray findings are unlikely to be positive.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that telephone-based interventions may be effective for patients with mental disorders, but further rigorous research is required. The authors' conclusion reflects the limited evidence available, but the absence of a fully reported review process and quality assessment of the included studies mean that the overall reliability of the review is unclear.
One of the largest drivers of the current obesity epidemic is thought to be excessive consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages. Some have proposed vending machine restrictions and taxing soft drinks to curb children's consumption of soft drinks; to a large extent, these policies have not been evaluated empirically. We examine these policies using two nationally representative data sets and find no evidence that, as currently practiced, either is effective at reducing children's weight. We conclude by outlining changes that may increase their effectiveness, such as implementing comprehensive restrictions on access to soft drinks in schools and imposing higher tax rates than are currently in place in many jurisdictions.

This study aimed to determine whether incidence density (ID) calculations of caries incidence rates would provide a more sensitive means of detecting caries-preventive effects than would traditional techniques. A secondary analysis was conducted using data from a 1981 study in which three dentifrices were compared in a double-blind randomized clinical trial. Subjects were examined at baseline and 1, 2 and 3 years after baseline. Three-year DMFS increments were calculated for 1,754 subjects attending the baseline and 3-year examinations. Caries ID rates then were calculated for 2, 661 subjects who had at least two examinations, using each surface's net increment (-1, 0 or +1) as the numerator and the surface's time at risk as the denominator. Despite theoretical advantages, the ID method did not alter the conclusions drawn using DMFS increments, apparently because (a) subjects lost to follow-up were similar to those completing the study, and (b) loss to follow-up was similar among treatment groups.
Forty-seven children with migraine have been included in a double-blind cross-over study with pizotifen and placebo. The children received either pizotifen for 3 months followed by placebo or vice versa. Thirty-nine children completed the trial and there was no significant difference between active and placebo treatment as regards reduction of number of attacks, total and mean duration of attacks and duration of longest attacks. Pizotifen was well tolerated by the children.

We administer during 6 months in randomised way dihydroergotamine or flunarizine to 50 children affects of classical or common migraine. A significative improvement was estimated in frequency, intensity and duration of their crisis in 87% with dihydroergotamine and 79% with flunarizine, without significative differences from one to other. Dihydroergotamine was specially effective in children with vegetative lability. The secondary effects, 12% with dihydroergotamine and 20% with flunarizine, were trivial and advantageous even, without the necessity of stop the treatment in not any case.

Successful migraine prophylaxis with flunarizine has been reported in adults by several authors. We used flunarizine in a double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial in childhood migraine. Twenty-four children with classical or common migraine were followed by a 12-week flunarizine treatment period. Each patient took 5 mg/day of the drug before going to sleep. Twenty-four children with similar clinical characteristics were assigned to placebo treatment. Efficacy of flunarizine versus placebo was assessed on the basis of the reduction of headache frequency and duration. A statistical comparison was performed between values reported in the treatment period and those in the three months before. Children treated with flunarizine experienced a statistically significant reduction in headache (66%) and duration (51%). These results were statistically superior to those observed in the placebo group. Sixteen patients on flunarizine therapy experienced an improvement of more than 50% of both parameters. We found flunarizine is an effective agent in children's migraine prophylaxis. Moreover it is suitable for the low incidence of mild side effects.

We compared the inhibitory effects of inhaled salbutamol (S), ipratropium (I), and cromoglycate (C) on bronchospasm induced by exercise (EX) or hyperosmolar (HY) saline aerosol in a group of 11 subjects with stable asthma. Each subject had eight tests in a randomized order, four EX and four HY challenges, each preceded by the double-blind inhalation of either a placebo, 200 micrograms of S, 80 micrograms of I, or 4 mg of C. This study demonstrated that the three drugs protected against the two types of challenges in almost all subjects. Although we observed a large interindividual variability in the airway response to the challenges, there was no statistically significant difference in the mean percent protection after HY or EX challenges when these challenges were preceded by S, I, or C (p greater than 0.05). Moreover, for EX- and HY-induced bronchospasm, the mean percent protection afforded by the three medications was in the same order (S greater than I greater than C), although the protective effect against EX-induced was weaker than against HY-induced bronchospasm. This suggests that hyperosmolarity, although it may not be the sole factor involved, plays a role in EX-induced bronchospasm.

The effect of single-dose inhaled terbutaline, sodium cromo-glycate and budesonide were compared with control in 11 exercise-induced asthma (EIA) patients, aged 9-14 years. Patients exercise for 6 minutes, 15 minutes after inhaling drugs. The FVC, FEV1, PEFR and MMEF were recorded before exercise and after exercise at 5 minutes interval up to 25 minutes. After exercise, the mean (SEM) maximal percentage fall in FEV1 after placebo, 200 micrograms of terbutaline, 10 mg of sodium cromoglycate, and 100 micrograms of budesonide were 22.81 (3.45), 4.05 (2.11), 11.29 (1.18), and 20.36 (2.33) respectively. It was concluded that single-dose inhaled terbutaline and sodium cromoglycate resulted in a significant protective effect on exerxide-induced asthma whereas budesonide did not.

We interviewed 542 women whose mothers were in a randomized trial of diethylstilbestrol. Effects of diethylstilbestrol on the third generation were explored by ascertaining age at menarche for the women's daughters. A total of 123 daughters were > or = 10 years old (52 exposed and 71 unexposed). Age at menarche was unaffected by mother's prenatal diethylstilbestrol exposure.

Seventy-four patients with a pre-operative diagnosis of stomach or oesophageal cancer were entered into a randomized, controlled clinical trial to assess the value of a short course of pre-operative intravenous nutrition. The effectiveness of this treatment was assessed by the clinical course and monitored by means of immune and biochemical profiles. Pre-operative parenteral nutrition given over a 7-10-day period resulted in a significant reduction in the incidence of postoperative wound infections. Clinical benefit was confined to those patients who had a low serum albumin on admission to hospital. It is doubtful whether this limited benefit justifies the routine use of intravenous feeding, with its attendant hazards, in the pre-operative preparation of patients with upper gastrointestinal cancer.

210 psychiatric outpatients with generalised anxiety disorder (71), or panic disorder (74), or dysthymic disorder (65) diagnosed by an interview schedule for DSM-III were allocated by constrained randomisation to one of five treatments: diazepam (28), dothiepin (28), placebo (28), cognitive and behaviour therapy (84), and a self-help treatment programme (42). All treatments were given for 6 weeks and then withdrawn by 10 weeks. Ratings of psychopathology were made by psychiatric assessors blind to both treatment and diagnosis before treatment and at 2, 4, 6, and 10 weeks after randomisation. 18 patients had insufficient data for analysis because of early drop-out. There were no important differences in treatment response between the diagnostic groups, but diazepam was less effective than dothiepin, cognitive and behaviour therapy, or self-help, these three treatments being of similar efficacy. Significantly more patients in the placebo group took additional psychotropic drugs in the 10 week period, and those allocated to dothiepin and cognitive and behaviour therapy took the least.

CRD SUMMARY: This review reported that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were effective and well tolerated in the prevention of pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, especially in low-risk patients. These findings might not be reliable as there were statistical and clinical differences between trials and a small amount of data was analysed.
OBJECTIVE: To find out whether postoperative enteral feeding is safe and effective in patients with severe pancreatitis.
DESIGN: Prospective randomised trial.
SETTING: Teaching hospital, Latvia.
SUBJECTS: 29 patients who had been operated on for severe pancreatitis.
INTERVENTIONS: They were randomised to have either enteral nutrition and conventional intravenous fluids postoperatively (n = 11), or conventional intravenous fluids only (n = 18). 17 additional patients who had had major abdominal operations for other conditions were also given enteral nutrition and intravenous fluids and comprised the control group.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Nutritional intake, duration of stay in intensive care (ICU) and hospital morbidity, mortality, and outcome.
RESULTS: 1 patient died of the 11 given enteral nutrition combined with conventional intravenous fluids, compared with 5/18 given fluids only. The pattern of bowel transit in the fed group did not differ from that in the control group.
CONCLUSION: Postoperative enteral nutrition seems to be safe and effective in patients with severe pancreatitis and may improve survival. Our results suggest that enteral and parenteral nutrition may complement each other in seriously ill patients.

BACKGROUND: In the Term Breech Trial, the risk of adverse perinatal outcome was lower with planned cesarean section versus planned vaginal birth. We undertook secondary analyses to determine factors associated with adverse perinatal outcome.
STUDY DESIGN: By using multiple logistic regression analyses, we determined the effect of prelabor cesarean section, cesarean section during early labor, cesarean section during active labor versus vaginal birth, and other factors, on adverse perinatal outcome. For 1384 fetuses delivered after labor, we determined the effect of variables associated with labor on adverse perinatal outcome.
RESULTS: The risk of adverse perinatal outcome was lowest with prelabor cesarean section (odds ratio [OR]=0.13) and highest with vaginal birth. For those delivered after labor, labor augmentation (P=.007), birth weight less than 2.8 kg (P=.003), and longer time between pushing and delivery (P<.001) increased the risk, whereas the presence of an experienced clinician at delivery (P=.004) reduced the risk of adverse perinatal outcome.
CONCLUSION: Breech infants at term are best delivered by prelabor cesarean section.

BACKGROUND: The "toxicity" model of duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) suggests that longer DUP will be associated with poorer performance on cognitive tests in first-episode patients.
AIMS: To test this hypothesis on a sample of 113 patients in a community-based early intervention programme for psychosis.
METHOD: Information was collected concerning a number of possible predictors of cognitive functioning including DUP. These were examined for their relation to performance on an extensive battery of cognitive tests administered shortly after the patients' admission to the programme.
RESULTS: Although several variables such as gender, premorbid adjustment, education and handedness predicted cognitive functioning, no relation was found between DUP and performance on any component of the test battery.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings do not provide support for a toxic effect of DUP on cognitive functioning. Other mechanisms through which DUP might affect outcome such as psychological engulfment, social support and adherence to medication are discussed.

We assessed the use and acceptability of an injection device (Uniject) prefilled with oxytocin, as part of active management of third-stage labor (AMTL) by Indonesian midwives attending home births. We interviewed 140 village midwives (bidan di desa) and 2220 mothers whose deliveries they attended during the intervention period. We completed baseline and post-intervention assessments to determine their experiences and views of oxytocin Uniject use. Delivery logs and supervisory reports were reviewed. The assessment was done in three rural districts and one municipality in Lombok. Injection practices and oxytocin availability did not change dramatically, although dose accuracy, use of sterile injection equipment, and proper disposal improved when the Uniject device was used. Midwives had little difficulty using the Uniject device properly; they overwhelmingly preferred it to standard needles and syringes. Postpartum hemorrhage rates did not change substantially. Oxytocin via Uniject holds promise for safer, more convenient use of oxytocin by trained midwives attending home deliveries, thereby potentially reducing the incidence of postpartum hemorrhage.

Capsaicinoids are a group of chemicals found in chilli peppers, with bioactive properties. The purpose of this study is to systematically review research investigating the potential benefits capsaicinoid compounds may have in relation to weight management. Medical databases were searched and 90 trials found, 20 of which were selected for inclusion, involving 563 participants. Three main areas of potential benefit for weight management were found: (1) increased energy expenditure; (2) increased lipid oxidation and (3) reduced appetite. Trial duration, dosage and sized varied, though trials were generally of high quality with a low risk of bias. It was observed that consumption of capsaicinoids increases energy expenditure by approximately 50 kcal/day, and that this would produce clinically significant levels of weight loss in 1-2 years. It was also observed that regular consumption significantly reduced abdominal adipose tissue levels and reduced appetite and energy intake. The mechanism of action is not presently fully understood, although it is well accepted much of the effects are caused by stimulation of the TRPV1 receptor. While capsaicinoids are not a magic bullet for weight loss, the evidence is that they could play a beneficial role, as part of a weight management program.

This study examined the effects of work-site health promotion on employee absenteeism. Thirty-two work sites were randomized to programs for weight control and smoking cessation or to no treatment for 2 years. The prevalence of self-reported absences from work was assessed at baseline and follow-up. Results using work site as the unit of analysis showed a net reduction in the percent of workers reporting a sick day in the last month in treatment versus control work sites of 3.7% (P = .04) and 3.4% (P = .06) in cross-sectional and cohort analysis, respectively. Further analyses found that the rate of participation in smoking (P = .09) but not weight programs (P = .72) was positively associated with change in sick day prevalence and that this effect was strongest in baseline smokers (P = .002). It is concluded that work-site smoking cessation programs may yield important short-term economic benefits by reducing employee absenteeism.

This study examined the longitudinal association between contextual stress and health risk behaviors and the role of protective factors in a community epidemiologically-defined sample of urban African American adolescents (N = 500; 46.4% female). Structural equation modeling was used to create a latent variable measuring contextual stress (community violence, neighborhood disorder, and experiences with racial discrimination). Contextual stress in 8th grade was associated with aggressive behavior and substance use 2 years later for boys. For girls, contextual stress predicted later substance use, but not aggressive behavior. High academic competence and self-worth reduced the impact of contextual stress on substance use for boys. Implications for intervention and directions for future research on health risk behaviors among African American adolescents are discussed.

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of antioxidant vitamins on mortality and cancer incidence. The authors concluded that supplements containing beta-carotene are harmful in smokers and others at high risk for lung cancer, but appear to have no effect in the general population. This was a generally well-conducted review and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
Studies were conducted in Malindi, Kenya, to assess the response of Plasmodium falciparum to chloroquine and amodiaquine in vivo (by an extended 14-day test) and in vitro (with the Rieckmann micro test). In-vivo resistance was demonstrated in 19 of 69 (28%) infections treated with chloroquine, but in only 2 of 60 (3.3%) of those treated with amodiaquine (p less than 0.001). In-vitro resistance to chloroquine was demonstrated in 15 of 23 (65%) tests. In contrast, 22 of the same 23 isolates were sensitive to amodiaquine in vitro. Effective concentrations by probit analysis for 50% and 99% (EC50 and EC99) inhibition, respectively, were 180.7 and 4319.6 nmol/l for chloroquine and 12.2 and 147.0 nmol/l for amodiaquine. The results suggest that amodiaquine is effective for the treatment of chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria in Kenya.

Thirty-five porous-coated total hip arthroplasties were implanted in 25 patients with juvenile-onset or adult-onset rheumatoid arthritis and prospectively followed for a mean of 4.5 years (range, 3-6.5 years). Using the Harris hip rating, the mean hip score at the final follow-up evaluation was 91, and 86% of the hips had a good or excellent result. Thirty-one hips had no hip or thigh pain, while four had occasional slight pain. After surgery, 10 patients were employed and the remainder were ambulatory. There were no early or late deep infections. There was one reoperation for recurrent dislocation of the hip, but the components were not removed. Radiographic evaluation of the acetabular component showed that only one component had a complete radiolucent line in all three zones. Three femoral components had nonprogressive subsidence. At this intermediate-term follow-up period, porous-coated total hip arthroplasty is a promising technique that is likely to be successful in young patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

OBJECTIVE: Occult amniotic fluid infection has emerged as a possible cause of many heretofore unexplained preterm births. We sought to determine whether antimicrobial therapy is effective in preventing preterm delivery.
STUDY DESIGN: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial was conducted to study the efficacy of ampicillin-sulbactam and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid in women hospitalized for preterm labor between 24 and 34 weeks' gestation. During this investigation no tocolytics or steroids were used.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine women with preterm labor received antimicrobial therapy and 39 received placebos. The mean gestational ages at study entry were 29.8 +/- 0.4 weeks (SEM) and 30.6 +/- 0.3 weeks in the antimicrobial and placebo groups, respectively (not significant). Similarly, the mean gestational ages at delivery were 34.2 +/- 0.7 and 34.1 +/- 0.6 weeks, respectively (not significant). Other index values of pregnancy outcome, for example, birth weight, neonatal morbidity, and prenatal death, were not significantly improved by antimicrobial therapy given to the mother in preterm labor.
CONCLUSION: We find that antimicrobial therapy given to women in preterm labor is ineffective in the prevention of preterm birth.

Seventy-two patients with eczema were randomly allotted to one of two treatment groups: A, those receiving dermatological treatment only, and B, those receiving the same dermatological treatment plus psychiatric treatment, limited where possible to four months. Cases were followed up at six-monthly dermatological assessments, 57 (79%) for 18 months. The findings suggest that in the presence of overt emotional disturbance, of new psychological or psychophysiological symptoms preceding the rash by up to a year, and of high motivation for it, brief psychiatric treatment improves the outcome in eczema (the proportion clear at 18 months was about doubled), whereas in their absence such treatment may worsen it, especially in the short term.

Recent research suggests that the diet consumed in, or shortly before, pregnancy can potentially lead to maldevelopment and diseases in the offspring, which may become apparent at any time from the embryonic stage until old age. For example, maternal diet may affect the chance of twinning (and associated complications), malformation risk, brain development, and the offspring's fecundity and risk of contracting cardiovascular diseases and cancer in adult life. Prospectively designed longitudinal studies with sufficient size and data quality are much needed to substantiate or refute these hypotheses. At present, the Danish National Birth Cohort is likely to be the largest epidemiological database containing extensive information on maternal dietary exposures. By October 2002, 100 000 women had been recruited in early pregnancy, for long-term follow-up of themselves and their offspring. The present paper details the information available in the database on early nutritional exposures with emphasis on maternal dietary intake. We also present distributions of selected nutritional exposures.

A controlled, prospective, two-year follow-up study examined the relative effectiveness of short-term vs long-term psychiatric hospitalization. Results of the inpatient phase for a sample of 74 nonschizophrenic patients are reported here. About four weeks after admission the patients hospitalized for a short stay were discharged, and at that time were functioning better than the patients in the long-stay group. When the patients hospitalized for a long stay were discharged, three to fur months after admission, they were then functioning as well as, but not noticeably better than, the patients in the short-stay group had been at their earlier time of discharge. Patients with affective disorders were more impaired at admission and improved more than patients with other diagnoses, regardless of length of stay.
The effectiveness of intramuscular follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) administered as daily or alternate-day injections to patients with polycystic ovarian disease (PCOD) who previously failed to ovulate on clomiphene citrate was compared. The study comprised 20 treatment cycles of daily FSH and 19 of alternate-day FSH in 12 patients. The overall ovulation rate per cycle was 78% and was similar for both groups. Nine out of 12 patients achieved a pregnancy, with twice as many occurring in the alternate-day group. It is concluded that alternate-day FSH therapy is as effective as daily FSH in achieving ovulation and pregnancies in patients with PCOD resistant to treatment with clomiphene citrate.

In order to determine the relevance of radiographs of the lumbar spine in an A&E department 225 consecutive patients presenting in a 6-month period with acute back pain were studied. An analysis of the number of radiographs performed and their association with particular factors in the history and examination of the patient was performed. A total of 108 patients had radiographs (48%), with a total of seven fractures (6% of radiographs). All the patients with fractures had a history of direct trauma. Radiographs had no bearing on the decision to admit the patient. The indications for radiography of the lumbar spine in the A&E department are discussed.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluated the effects of temporary atrial pacing to prevent the atrial fibrillation following coronary artery bypass graft surgery and the risk factors to the occurrence of this arrhytmia.
METHODS: We have studied 160 patients who, at the end of coronary artery bypass graft surgery, were submitted to epicardial electrode implantation in the right atrium lateral wall. They were randomized into two groups: non-pacing (NP) group and right atrial (RA) pacing group. The cardiac rhythm was monitorized over 72 hours following to the end of surgery and the variables studied were as follow: incidence of atrial fibrillation; the risk factors pre-, intra-, and postoperative for its occurrence, and postoperative events.
RESULTS: There were 21 (13.1%) episodes of atrial fibrillation, 20 in the NP group and one in the RA group. The relative risk (RR) for the development of atrial fibrillation was 0.18 (95% CI; 0.05-0.60) for the RA group when compared to the NP group. The logistic regression identified that the study variables, such as younger age; use of beta-blockers in the preoperative, and the presence of right atrial pacing had been associated to a lower Odds ratios (ORs) for the occurrence of atrial fibrillation in the postoperative.
CONCLUSIONS: The temporary atrial pacing reduced the incidence of atrial fibrillation after the CABG surgery. Older age and a non-atrial pacing were the independent predictive factors of the occurrence of this arrhythmia.

CRD SUMMARY: This review aimed to determine the effect of home telehealth on clinical care outcomes. It concluded that telehealth was an effective clinical intervention in many settings with different patient groups. Given various methodological limitations of the review, this conclusion cannot be considered entirely reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that fenestrated endovascular aortic aneurysm repair appeared to be feasible, safe and effective, in relatively high-risk patients, with pararenal abdominal aortic aneurysms, at up to two years after surgery. Given the high likelihood of bias in the included studies and the absence of any comparator therapies, the reliability of the authors' conclusions is uncertain.
School and community agency collaboration can potentially increase physical activity opportunities for youth. Few studies have examined the role of community agencies in promoting physical activity, much less in collaboration with schools. This article describes formative research data collection from community agencies to inform the development of the Trial of Activity for Adolescent Girls (TAAG) intervention to provide out-of-school physical activity programs for girls. The community agency survey is designed to assess agency capacity to provide physical activity programs for girls, including resources, programs, and partnerships. Most agency respondents (n = 138) report operations during after-school hours, adequate facilities, and program options for girls, although most are sport oriented. Agency resources and programming vary considerably across the six TAAG field sites. Many agencies report partnerships, some involving schools, although not necessarily related to physical activity. Implications for the TAAG intervention are presented.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate how a prior affective disorder (major depression or generalized anxiety disorder) affects current fatigue among individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). To determine whether that relationship is mediated by self-efficacy expectations.
METHODS: Forty-eight RA patients with a prior affective disorder and 74 without a history of affective disorder completed a mailed questionnaire that included the Multidimensional Assessment of Fatigue and indicators of neuroticism and self efficacy.
RESULTS: RA patients with a history of affective disorder reported higher levels of fatigue than those with no previous affective disturbance. Controlling for neuroticism and self efficacy, affective disorder history continued to predict current fatigue. Mediational analyses revealed both direct and indirect effects (via self efficacy) of history of affective disorder on the experience of fatigue in RA.
CONCLUSION: History of affective disorder independently predicts higher levels of fatigue in RA patients, and self efficacy plays a mediating role in this relationship.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of the new UK alcohol licensing law on overnight attendances to the emergency department.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study at the emergency department of St Thomas' Hospital, London over 2 months, one before and one after the introduction of the new legislation. All people over the age of 16 years who attended the emergency department between 21:00 and 09:00 during the two study periods (March 2005 and March 2006) were included. An alcohol-related attendance was defined as having occurred if there was documentation of alcohol consumption before attendance, or of alcohol intoxication in relation to the patient's physical examination or final diagnosis. The primary outcome measure was change in the number and percentage of alcohol related attendances to the emergency department between the two study periods. Secondary outcome measures, compared between the two study periods, were number and percentage of alcohol-related attendances as a consequence of assault, and of injury; and number and percentage of alcohol-related attendances resulting in admission to hospital.
RESULTS: In March 2005 there were 2736 overnight attendances to the ED, of which 79 (2.9%) were classified as alcohol related. In comparison, in March 2006 there were a total of 3135 overnight attendances, of which 250 (8%) were alcohol related, representing a significant increase (p<0.001). There were also significant increases in percentage of alcohol related attendances as a consequence of injury (p<0.001) and assault (p = 0.002); and in admission rates for alcohol related attendances (p<0.001) between the two study periods.
CONCLUSIONS: Overnight alcohol related emergency attendances to St Thomas' hospital increased after the introduction of new alcohol licensing legislation. If reproduced over longer time periods and across the UK as a whole, the additional burden on emergency care could be substantial.

OBJECTIVE: For long-term treatment effects, patients with subacute back pain need to adhere to treatment recommendations beyond the prescribed exercise treatment. Adherence rates are as low as 30%, so we developed a cognitive-behavioural training programme to enhance patients' self-efficacy, maximise severity perceptions and reduce barrier perceptions.
METHOD: A 2 x 4 (group x time) repeated measurement design was applied. Forty-seven patients with non-specific, subacute back pain were randomly assigned to a training group (exercise treatment plus cognitive-behavioural training programme) or a control group (exercise treatment only).
RESULTS: Repeated measures ANOVA revealed significant main and interaction effects; the training group reported enhanced self-efficacy and severity perceptions, reduced barrier perceptions, and self-reported that they exercised more often than the control group over time. However, no group differences regarding pain intensity emerged.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that a short and inexpensive cognitive-behavioural training programme is an effective tool to enable back pain patients to follow treatment recommendations on a regular basis.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: The short and simple intervention can easily be conducted by personnel, other than psychologists, i.e., physiotherapists.

Noncompliance is a major contributing factor to therapeutic failure. Many complex variables hae been reported to interfere with patient compliance. Though there are exceptions, educational techniques have been shown to be of value. Patients with diagnoses of schizophrenia, and bipolar and unipolar affective disorders were separated into control and experimental groups and studied to determine the factors associated with poor compliance and the potential value of educational techniques. Following a course of lectures and data sheets, the "educated" patients tended to be more compliant on outpatient follow-up. They were also less fearful of side effects and addiction. Factors associated with poor compliance were related to severity of illness, social isolation, fear of dependency and side effects (extra-pyramidal).

The introduction of the UKCC Scope of Professional Practice (1992a) has encouraged many practitioners to develop their practice in specific areas of nursing including tissue viability. As a result, practitioners wish to develop their knowledge to ensure they deliver the most effective evidence-based care to patients. The author discusses the importance of evidence-based tissue viability education, which integrates input from educationalists and clinicians.

This study reports on the experience of women in four community breast cancer self-help groups in Ontario, Canada. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 24 women, asking them about benefits and limitations of their group involvement, and about their perspectives on group processes and structures. Overall, participants reported their group involvement to be extremely helpful for navigating the short and long-term impact of breast cancer. Emotional support benefits included connecting with other breast cancer survivors, feeling understood and sharing experiences, providing hope, and sharing healing laughter. Informational and practical support benefits included sharing of important information and learning how to get what you want. Even where there were concerns about limitations or tensions of group experience, these occurred against a backdrop of appreciation and commitment. From the discussion of group processes and structures, a number of issues were identified as problematic. Most notable were how to deal with deaths of group members and how to balance the group's primary purpose of providing mutual support with secondary goals of dealing with group business and engaging in meaningful advocacy.

Two approaches, (a) patient education and (b) compliance-contingent social reinforcement, were employed to improve compliance with fluid restrictions in a chronically noncompliant hemodialysis patient of borderline intellectual functioning. Results indicated that only social reinforcement led to improved compliance (i.e., decreased intersession weight gain). Treatment effects were well maintained at both 3- and 6-month follow-ups. Contingency management strategies are recommended as a potentially cost effective treatment for noncompliance in hemodialysis patients.

1. A dayroom program focused intensively on functional needs and was implemented for confused geriatric inpatients who otherwise might have been restrained or required sitters. 2. There were fewer complications from hospitalization documented for dayroom patients. 3. There was an increase in family satisfaction regarding the nursing care provided for patients in the alternative environment.

OBJECTIVE:   To improve the quality of clinical care for women with severe pre-eclampsia. METHODS: A criteria-based audit was conducted in a large government hospital in Uganda. Management practices were evaluated against standards developed by an expert panel by retrospectively evaluating 43 case files. Results of the audit were presented, and recommendations developed and implemented. A re-audit was conducted 6 months later.  RESULTS:   The initial audit showed that most standards were rarely achieved. Reasons were discussed. Guidelines were produced, additional supplies were purchased following a fundraising effort, labor ward procedures were streamlined, and staffing was increased. In the re-audit there were significant improvements in diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment.  CONCLUSION:   Criteria-based audit can improve the quality of maternity care in countries with limited resources.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the results obtained in two successive audits to observe the effectiveness of this control method.
DESIGN: The care process followed by pregnant women attended in 1986-87 is compared with that in 1988.
LOCATION: Cartuja Health Centre (Granada).
PARTICIPANTS: Data referring to 20 markers with defined quality criteria are obtained by auditing clinical protocols.
METHODS AND MAIN RESULTS: The qualitative markers were compared to the comparison test of two proportions for separate samples and the quantitative markers with the of student for separate samples and equal variants. The quality index improved in 9 markers and worsened in 1; the remainder did not change. The results prove the effectiveness of quality control to improve care given in a Health Centre.

OBJECTIVES: To study whether linguistic analysis and changes in information leaflets can improve readability and understanding.
DESIGN: Randomised, controlled study. Two information leaflets concerned with trials of drugs for conditions/diseases which are commonly known were modified, and the original was tested against the revised version.
SETTING: Denmark.
PARTICIPANTS: 235 persons in the relevant age groups.
MAIN MEASURES: Readability and understanding of contents.
RESULTS: Both readability and understanding of contents was improved: readability with regard to both information leaflets and understanding with regard to one of the leaflets.
CONCLUSION: The results show that both readability and understanding can be improved by increased attention to the linguistic features of the information.

This study reports a 9-18 month follow-up of a randomised controlled trial of pain management programmes for chronic, non-malignant pain. Twenty-two inpatients, 18 outpatients and 12 control subjects completed the follow-up assessments. Significant treatment effects were demonstrated by the inpatient group on pain ratings, the Pain Behaviour Checklist, and General Health Questionnaire, with similar effects demonstrated by the outpatient group on the former 2 measures. The findings were confounded by higher inpatient scores at pretreatment, in comparison with the 2 other conditions. There was a high drop-out rate of subjects, particularly from the control condition which illustrates the limitations of controlled group designs in this area. Analgesic use, activity levels and pain ratings were also evaluated using the criteria for 'success' described by Malec et al. (1981). Results indicated that 68% of inpatients, 61% of outpatients and 21% of control subjects met all 3 criteria. Both treatment programmes were effective in returning patients to paid employment, whilst 3 control group patients gave up work. The cost-benefit implications of these changes are discussed. We conclude that pain management programmes contribute substantially to the rehabilitation of chronic pain sufferers.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found small beneficial effects of culturally sensitive interventions, on substance use, in young people from ethnic minority groups, in the USA. Some methodological flaws mean that the authors' conclusions may not be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that all-cause perioperative mortality and aneurysm-related mortality at short- and intermediate-term follow-up were lower following endovascular repair compared with open surgical repair in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms. The authors' conclusions appear reasonable and are likely to be reliable.
The efficacy of a postoperative blood salvage system was assessed in 239 consecutive patients undergoing total knee or total hip arthroplasty. Patients were randomly allocated to either a control group using a standard drainage system or to the study group using the Solcotrans blood salvage canister. The median amount of homologous blood required after operation by the study group was reduced by 74% from the amount required by the control group (mean, 67 ml vs 256 ml, respectively; P less than .0001). Thirteen percent (13%) of the study group required postoperative homologous blood transfusions, as compared to 39% of the control group (P less than .0001). Additionally, patients in the study group had higher hemoglobin levels beginning on the first postoperative day. This study indicates that a postoperative blood salvage system safely and effectively reduces the amount of homologous blood required and sustains higher hemoglobin levels after operation.
Two groups of 21 otherwise healthy patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) for the first time were studied in order to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of post-operative autotransfusion using a red cell 'salvage' method. Group 1 patients (control group) were transfused using donor blood only. Group 2 patients were transfused with their own (autologous) blood, salvaged post-operatively, although donor blood was also available to them if needed. The two groups were further subdivided according to whether the patients received aspirin pre-operatively or not. The four subgroups thus formed were comparable pre- as well as intra-operatively, with respect to all available clinical and laboratory criteria. The post-operative data, however, showed that the combination of pre-operative aspirin and autotransfusion leads to excessive post-operative bleeding, together with increased donor blood requirement. It was also shown that autotransfusion without aspirin does reduce the need for donor blood transfusion without any increase in post-operative bleeding. Although aspirin alone did not increase post-operative bleeding or donor blood requirement, its combination with autotransfusion should be avoided.
A series of 135 adults undergoing cardiac surgery was randomized to an autotransfusion group (n = 67) or a control group (n = 68). In the autotransfusion group mediastinal blood was collected and reinfused during the first 6 postoperative hours. Blood from the reservoir was taken for bacteriologic culture at the end of that time. The postoperative blood was comparable in the two groups. The average requirement of bank blood was 2.7 units in the autotransfusion group and 3.3 units in the controls (p less than 0.05). The average volume of autotransfusion blood was 336 ml. There were no clinical infections in the autotransfusion group, although 19% of the cultures were positive, and no apparent alteration of the coagulation mechanisms arose from infusion of autologous blood. No clinically significant intergroup differences were found in hematologic, renal or hepatic parameters, neurologic function or use of antibiotics.
To evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the collection and retransfusion of postoperatively shed mediastinal blood as part of a multifaceted approach to blood conservation following cardiac operation, 113 patients were randomized into either an autotransfusion group (54 patients) or a control group (59 patients). Intraoperative and postoperative hemodilution was practiced in all patients. The clinical safety of this technique was confirmed by the lack of septic, hematological, pulmonary, renal, or hepatic complications. However, in this setting where blood conservation is already aggressively practiced, the ability of the technique to further reduce the use of banked blood following cardiac surgical procedures was not demonstrated.
OBJECTIVE: The goals of this study were to determine whether fluoxetine is superior to placebo in treating HIV-seropositive patients with major depression or dysthymia or both, whether severity of immunosuppression is associated with treatment response, and whether fluoxetine treatment is associated with change in immune status as measured by CD4 cell count. METHOD: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 8-week trial of fluoxetine was conducted in a university-affiliated research outpatient clinic. The fluoxetine-placebo randomization was 2:1. All patients were offered 4 months of additional open treatment. Main outcome measures included the Clinical Global Impression, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, and CD4 cell count. RESULTS: Of 120 patients randomly assigned to fluoxetine or placebo, 87 completed 8 weeks of treatment. In the total group, 51% had AIDS. All but three were men, 35% were nonwhite, and 6% had intravenous drug use as a risk factor. In an intention-to-treat analysis, 57% of fluoxetine patients and 41% of placebo patients were responders. Among patients who completed the study, 74% responded to fluoxetine and 47% to placebo; this difference was statistically significant. Severity of immunosuppression was not related to antidepressant response, attrition, or side effects, and fluoxetine treatment was not associated with change in CD4 cell count. CONCLUSIONS: Fluoxetine is an effective antidepressant in the context of HIV illness. However, both placebo response and attrition were substantial, suggesting both that nonspecific factors may be more salient and that yet another medication (i.e., an antidepressant) may be less acceptable among patients with serious medical illness already requiring multiple concomitant medications.
Little has been done to study the effectiveness of antidepressants in controlling anxiety/depression in a population of cancer patients. A double-blind placebo-controlled study was therefore designed to assess the effectiveness of 20 mg fluoxetine. Of 115 cancer patients who fulfilled entry criteria for levels of distress, 45 patients were randomized to a fluoxetine treatment group (FA) and 46 patients to a placebo group (PA) after a 1-week placebo period designed to exclude placebo responders. The Montgomery and Asberg Depression Scale (MADRS), the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAS), the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), the Revised Symptom Checklist (SCL90-R) and the Spitzer Quality of Life Index (SQOLI) were used to assess the efficacy of fluoxetine. The response rate, defined by a HADS score lower than 8 after 5 weeks of treatment, was not significantly higher in the FA group (11%) compared to the PA group (7%). Compared to the PA group, patients in the FA group showed a significantly greater decrease in SCL90-R mean total score after 5 weeks, but not a greater decrease in HADS mean score. No difference between the two groups was found in observer-reported assessments (MADRS, HAS and SQOLI). Significantly more drop-outs were observed in the FA group (n = 15) than in the PA group (n = 7), although the frequencies of side-effects were not significantly different.
During each of two six-week treatment periods, 12 depressed outpatients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease received increasing doses of doxepin hydrochloride or a placebo as tolerated. The mean maximal doses of doxepin hydrochloride and placebo were 105 and 128 mg, respectively. Three of the 12 patients dropped out because of doxepin's side effects. The depression and anxiety scores at the end of the treatment periods were virtually identical and not significantly different from baseline scores. Changes in the 12-minute walking distance were more closely correlated with changes in the depression and anxiety scores than with changes in the forced expiratory volume in 1 s or forced vital capacity. Thus, doxepin is ineffective in treating depressed patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; improvements in the 12-minute walking distance were closely correlated with improvements in the depression or anxiety scores.
The effectiveness of Norplant implants over a seven year period of continuous use was studied in a multicenter trial. Pregnancy rates were 0.4 per 100 in both year six and year seven. More than 3,600 women completed 6 years and more than 2,400 women completed 7 years. Pregnancy rates increased with weight (p < .05) and decreased with age, but in years 6 and 7 combined, the pregnancy rate neither reached nor exceeded 1 per 100 woman years in any 5 year age group or in any 10 kg weight group.
This paper investigates the relationship between pregnancy rates and body weight of 1005 women using a vaginal ring releasing 20 micrograms levonorgestrel per 24 hours. While the overall pregnancy rate at one year was 3.7%, it was found that women have an increasing risk of pregnancy with increasing body weight. For example, a woman of 40 kg has an estimated pregnancy rate of 1.7% in contrast to 9.8% for a woman of 80 kg weight.
The purpose of this prospective randomized study was to evaluate use of a hyaluronan-rich transfer medium in fresh and frozen-thawed single blastocyst transfer. The study included 279 single blastocyst transfers in women aged<37 years in their first, second or third treatment cycle. According to the type of single blastocyst transfer (fresh elective or frozen-thawed) the women were divided into two study and two control groups. In both study groups (n=130) transfers were performed using hyaluronan and in the control groups (n=149) a conventional transfer medium was used. The results indicate that fresh elective single blastocyst transfer with hyaluronan results in significantly higher pregnancy rates in a selected subgroup of women; those with >or=2 blastocysts developed to day 5 and a previous implantation failure (55% versus 10%; P=0.012). Overall pregnancy rates after fresh elective and frozen-thawed single blastocyst transfer were similar in both study and control groups.
We compared the implantation and pregnancy rate through in vitro fertilization (IVF) using hyaluronic acid and albumin as transfer medium in 60 women randomly allocated to 2 groups. In treatment group A (n = 30), embryos were transferred to medium supplemented with hyaluronic acid. In the control group B (n = 30), embryos were transferred to medium containing albumin. There were no significant differences between the groups in terms of mean age of the females, mean duration of infertility and mean number of embryos. The pregnancy rate in groups A and B were 81.8% and 71.4% respectively, a non-statistically significant difference. Hyaluronic acid can successfully replace albumin as transfer medium.
Mothers and midwives who had participated in the Bristol randomized controlled trial of active versus physiologic management of the Third Stage of Labor were asked for their views. One hundred ninety-one mothers (11% of the total randomized) and 49 midwives completed self-administered questionnaires. Both mothers and midwives commented adversely about the length of the third stage under physiologic management. In general, their views were in accord with the conclusions of the main trial (based on clinical data, including maternal blood loss, length of third stage, need for therapeutic oxytocic agents, and specified neonatal morbidity) in favor of continuing with the current practice of active management.
We evaluated the efficacy of the nonergot dopamine receptor agonist pramipexole in 16 patients with advanced Parkinson's disease and marked rest tremor during an "on" period. The patients were drawn from a larger placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial, which was not originally designed to investigate the effect of pramipexole on tremor. Eleven patients received pramipexole. The first effects were seen with a pramipexole dose of 0.75 mg/d with a reduction of the tremor item A of Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS III, "on" state) by 25% and of rigidity and akinesia by 22%. Under the highest dose, 4.5 mg/d, the tremor score was improved by 61% over baseline (p < 0.0056, Wilcoxon signed rank) and the sum of rigidity and akinesia items by 66% (p < 0.0038, Wilcoxon signed rank). Five patients received placebo and did not improve. Based on this sample of patients, the nonergot dopamine receptor agonist pramipexole appears to have a potent anti-rest tremor action while being effective against akinesia and rigidity.
We performed a double-blind parallel study of deprenyl 5 mg BID vs. placebo in treatment of "on-off" oscillations complicating Parkinson's disease. After a 2-week baseline period, treatment was given for 6 weeks with weekly evaluations using the Northwestern Disability Scale and patients' hourly self-assessment of "on-off" status performed at home. Patients on deprenyl experienced significant improvement in time spent in the "on" state. They were also more likely than patients on placebo to experience improvement of severity of tremor and hypomimia during the "on" state. No other areas of disability improved in quality. Side effects such as hallucinations and worsening of choreoathetosis were frequent among the deprenyl group but generally responded to reduction in concomitant levodopa/carbidopa dosage. We conclude that deprenyl is moderately useful in ameliorating "on-off" in a majority of patients.
This randomised, double-blind study compared single dose lumiracoxib (a cyclooxygenase-2 selective inhibitor) 100 and 400 mg, ibuprofen 400 mg and placebo in patients with postoperative dental pain over 12 h. The primary efficacy variable was pain intensity difference. Lumiracoxib 400 mg and ibuprofen were superior to placebo from 1 to 12 h post dose while lumiracoxib 100 mg was superior from 1.5 to 9 h. Lumiracoxib 400 mg demonstrated the fastest median time to onset of analgesia (37.4 min) followed by ibuprofen (41.5), and lumiracoxib 100 mg (52.4; all p < or = 0.001 vs. placebo). Median time to rescue medication (h) was longer for lumiracoxib 400 mg (> or = 12), lumiracoxib 100 mg (approximately 7) and ibuprofen (approximately 8) than placebo (approximately 2; all p < or = 0.001 vs. placebo). Patients rated lumiracoxib 400 mg superior to the other active treatments (p < 0.05); lumiracoxib 100 mg was comparable with ibuprofen and superior to placebo (p < 0.001). Lumiracoxib provided rapid, effective and well-tolerated analgesia.
This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study compared the efficacy and tolerability of lumiracoxib (a novel COX-2 selective inhibitor) with rofecoxib, celecoxib and placebo in patients with moderate-to-severe post-operative dental pain. Following third molar extraction, patients received single oral doses of lumiracoxib 400 mg, rofecoxib 50 mg, celecoxib 200 mg or placebo (n = 355). Additional patients from a similar study, assigned to lumiracoxib, rofecoxib or placebo (n = 155), were included for analysis of the primary variable, Summed Pain Intensity Difference over the first 8 h post dose (SPID-8). For SPID-8, lumiracoxib was superior to rofecoxib (p < 0.05), celecoxib (p < 0.001) and placebo (p < 0.001). Lumiracoxib demonstrated the fastest onset of analgesia and the longest time to rescue medication use. Patient global evaluation of lumiracoxib was comparable to rofecoxib and superior to celecoxib and placebo. All treatments were well tolerated. Lumiracoxib 400 mg provides rapid, effective and sustained relief of post-operative dental pain, comparable or superior to rofecoxib.
More than 50% of the patients with perianorectal abscess treated with traditional incisional drainage will lead to fistula formation postoperatively. We present a procedure of primary curative incision for treatment with perianorectal abscess without fistula formation. The result of primary curative incision in comparison with traditional incisional drainage in a randomized control study showed that the incidence of postoperative fistula formation and recurrent abscess was 2.56% in the former and 56.25% in the latter. The key points of the procedure were discussed in detail and the causes and prevention of the disease occurred after injection of sclerotic drugs for hemorrhoids were also discussed.
In a randomized trial we compared the treatment of perianal abscess by incision only (18 patients) with that by incision followed by fistulotomy 3 days later (20 patients). All patients were observed for 12 months. There were no differences between the two groups with regard to recurrent abscess/fistula, but the fistulotomy group had a statistically significantly higher prevalence of flatus incontinence. Further, fistulotomy was followed by significantly longer duration of hospitalization and by delayed healing. We recommend that fistulotomy is used only in patients with recurrent abscess.
The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of music therapy on pain perception of stroke patients during upper extremity joint exercises. Ten stroke patients (1 male and 9 females) ranging in age from 61 to 73 participated in the study. Music conditions used in the study consisted of: (a) song, (b) karaoke accompaniment (same music to condition A except singers' voices), and (c) no music. Exercise movements in this study included hand, wrist, and shoulder joints. During the 8-week period music therapy sessions, subjects repeated 3 conditions according to the randomized orders and subjects rated their perceived pain on a scale immediately after each condition. The General Linear Model (GLM) Repeated Measures ANOVA revealed that there were no significant differences in pain rating across the three music conditions. However, positive affects and verbal responses, while performing upper extremity exercises with both music and karaoke accompaniment music, were observed using video observations.
Efforts are being made to improve the efficiency and quality of care in intensive care units (ICUs) at Latter Day Saints Hospital. The ICUs have been computerized, and the collection, storage, and presentation of patients' data have been improved. Nurses use computers for entering clinical data and plans for nursing care, and the effects of these changes on the work patterns of nurses in the ICU have been evaluated. Contrary to our expectation, our studies showed a decrease in the proportion of time that nurses spent in direct patient care (from 49.1% to 43.2%) and an increase in the proportion they spent entering clinical data (from 18.2% to 24.2%) after computerization. These changes, however, were attributed to a decrease in the severity of patients' illnesses, rather than the availability of the computer. There was no measurable difference in the proportion of time spent at other nursing activities.

Azithromycin (total dose 1.5 g) given orally in five or six doses over 5 days was compared with erythromycin and cloxacillin both given orally as 500 mg four times daily for 7 days in two multicentre studies of patients with skin and associated soft-tissue infections. Azithromycin eradicated baseline pathogen(s), mainly Staphylococcus aureus, in 89% compared with in 78%, of erythromycin-treated patients (P = 0.501) and in 78% compared with in 59% of cloxacillin-treated patients (P = 0.421). No statistically significant difference in clinical cure was reported between azithromycin (74%) and erythromycin (75%, P = 1.00) and between azithromycin (60%) and cloxacillin (47%, P = 0.301) treatment groups. The side-effects reported for azithromycin were mainly mild or moderate gastro-intestinal complaints and there were no major abnormalities in laboratory parameters. It is concluded that azithromycin was as effective as, but better tolerated than, either erythromycin or cloxacillin and short-course therapy may improve patient compliance.
A double blind study comparing a single dose of amoxicillin versus a 10-day course of amoxicillin in the treatment of acute otitis media (AOM) was undertaken. All children diagnosed with AOM in a pediatric clinic were requested to participate. After tympanocentesis was performed, patients were randomly assigned to receive either amoxicillin (100 mg/kg) followed by placebo every 8 hours for 10 days or placebo followed by amoxicillin (40 mg/kg/D) for 10 days. Patients returned to clinic on days 3 and 10 post-treatment. Seventeen patients were enrolled: 7 received single dose therapy and 10 received 10 days of therapy. There were no failures in the control group and 3 failures in the single dose group (day 5, day 6, and 11) (p = 0.05). Middle ear isolates included: S. pneumoniae 7, H. influenzae 4, B. catarrhalis 1, and no pathogen in 5. Due to the significant number of failures in the treatment group, the study was prematurely terminated.
Azithromycin is a newly developed azalide antibiotic which is very active against microbes causing respiratory tract infections; tissue concentrations remain elevated for a long time after discontinuation of treatment. A clinical study was conducted to compare azithromycin (10 mg/kg administered as a single daily dose for 3 days) with amoxycillin/clavulanic acid (50 mg/kg/day given b.i.d. for 10 days) in 30 children with otitis media. Sensitivity testing demonstrated good azithromycin activity against beta-haemolytic streptococci, Moraxella catarrhalis, Haemophilus influenzae and Staphylococcus aureus. By day 12, clinical cure was recorded in 14/15 children treated with azithromycin and this was maintained at day 30. In the day 12 and 13/15 children by day 30. It was concluded that a 3-day azithromycin regimen produces a satisfactory clinical response and the eradication of key pathogens, and was acceptable for children.
This study evaluated the efficacy of a single dose of intramuscular ceftriaxone for acute otitis media in children, using amoxicillin as a control. (There is currently no established single-dose treatment for this condition.) In a prospective, randomized, double-blind, clinical trial, 233 children, aged 5 months to 5 years, with uncomplicated acute otitis media were randomly assigned to receive either a single intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg) plus placebo oral suspension for 10 days, or a placebo injection plus amoxicillin oral suspension (40 mg/kg per day divided three times per day) for 10 days in a double-blind fashion. Demographic and clinical characteristics were similar in both groups. Treatment was successful in 107 of 117 given amoxicillin (91%, 95% confidence interval 86% to 97%) and 105 of 116 given ceftriaxone (91%, 95% confidence interval 85% to 96%). Rates of improvement, failure, relapse, and reinfection were similar in both groups, as were the otoscopic and tympanometric evaluations at the 14- and 60-day follow-up visits. It is concluded that a single intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg) is as effective as 10 days of oral amoxicillin for the treatment of uncomplicated acute otitis media in children.
A donor-supported competitive voucher scheme in Nicaragua provides prevention and treatment services for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and HIV/AIDS to high-risk populations such as sex workers and their partners and clients. Beyond detecting and treating STIs, HIV and AIDS, these health services can also raise awareness of risks and promote safer behavior, leading to widespread benefits. This review describes the voucher scheme, summarizes published data on Chlamydia trachomatis infection in Nicaragua and provides preliminary prevalence data on C. trachomatis obtained in 2003 through the voucher scheme.

This descriptive study explored the quality of life and coping methods of HIV positive women (N = 52) with children. The sample consisted of women with HIV/AIDS who answered an adapted Padilla Quality of Life Index and the Jalowiec Coping Scale. Among the psychological, physical, and social quality of life subscales, social quality of life was rated highest and the psychological scale rated the lowest. Among the three styles of coping, confrontive was used most frequently, passive and emotive less frequently. Significant relationships between coping and quality of life were examined. It is essential that nurses working with women with HIV disease be aware of their common concerns and provide effective strategies to improve quality of life such as enhancing decision making and coping skills within the context of the family unit.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the safety of long-acting formulations of tramadol hydrochloride in the treatment of chronic osteoarthritis pain and concluded that differences in formulations may influence rates of adverse events. However, these differences should be interpreted with caution. Potential bias in the review, heterogeneity among studies and their unclear quality, support the authors' recommendation to interpret the findings with caution.
One hundred thirteen patients were prospectively evaluated to determine the prophylactic effect of mezlocillin in women undergoing cesarean section. Subjects received 2 gm of mezlocillin or placebo intravenously 30 minutes before surgery and four and nine hours after surgery. All patients were evaluated for febrile morbidity and for the development of specific infections. The overall postoperative morbidity was reduced from 51% in the control group to 17% in the mezlocillin group (P less than 0.01). Separate analyses of morbidity in patients undergoing cesarean section after the onset of labor and those having the operation before the onset of labor showed the significant reduction of morbidity by mezlocillin to have occurred only in the former group.
We describe a case of transient hyperinsulinism in an asphyxiated newborn infant with hypoglycemia. Although hypoglycemia in birth asphyxiated infants is generally attributed to depletion of glycogen stores, we observed severe hyperinsulinism associated with the hypoglycemia. The hypoglycemia was refractory to high glucose delivery rates (25 mg/kg/min), but responded to a combination of octreotide and diazoxide. At 3 weeks of age, the medications were discontinued and infant was normoglycemic on glucose infusion rates of 5-8 mg/kg/min. Subsequent insulin studies were within normal limits. Transient hyperinsulinism should be considered in asphyxiated infants with protracted hypoglycemia and medications designed to suppress insulin secretion may be useful in refractory cases.

We estimated the cost and cost-effectiveness of a clinical pharmacist intervention known to improve the appropriateness of drug prescribing. Elderly veteran outpatients prescribed at least five drugs were randomized to an intervention (105 patients) or control (103) group and followed for 1 year. The intervention pharmacist provided advice to patients and their physicians during all general medicine visits. Mean fixed and variable costs/intervention patient were $36 and $84, respectively Health services use and costs were comparable between groups. Intervention costs ranged from $7.50-30/patient/unit change in drug appropriateness. The cost to improve the appropriateness of drug prescribing is thus relatively low.

Two hundred healthy patients scheduled for elective minor gynaecological surgery under general anaesthesia were randomly allocated to one of four groups who received either diclofenac 75 mg intramuscularly (i.m.), ketorolac 30 mg i.m., diclofenac 50 mg orally, or 2 mL NaCl i.m. The drugs were administered 10-20 min prior to a standard anaesthetic. All surgery was uneventful. The patients were discharged after a mean of 110 +/- 30 min with no differences between the groups. Complaints about pain and need for post-operative analgesics were significantly less frequent in the two groups of patients receiving an intramuscular non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), as compared to placebo. The patients who received 50 mg diclofenac orally, administered shortly before the procedure, had the same pain course as the placebo patients.

For many years yohimbine was a common treatment for disorders of potency and libido. However, yohimbine was withdrawn from use in the United Kingdom on account of inadequacy of the documentation confirming its efficiency. We report here the results of a double blind, cross over, placebo controlled trial of yohimbine hydrochloride 5.4 mg three times daily in the treatment of erectile inadequacy of mixed aetiology. Efficacy data are presented on 61 of 70 men recruited to the trial. Yohimbine was associated with a significant improvement in the quality of stimulated erections. The drug was generally well tolerated
Levamisole, the anthelmintic drug was tried in ENL (Erythema Nodosum Leprosum) cases using double blind control trial in dosage of 150 mg/day on three consecutive days for three months. It was found that levamisole was not effective in ENL cases and no severe side effect was seen in these cases.

CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was no difference in the effectiveness and safety of short- versus long-course antimicrobial treatment for adult and paediatric patients with mild to moderate community-acquired pneumonia. The authors' conclusions reflect the evidence presented, but should not be considered definitive given the small number of trials in the analysis.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found that immunonutrition decreased morbidity and hospital stay, but not mortality, after major gastrointestinal elective surgery; tolerance of enteral feeding with immunonutrition was similar to that with standard formula. Given the potential for bias and error in some parts of the review process, this conclusion should be interpreted cautiously.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that available research on the impact of cognitive-behavioural therapy for anxiety disorders on concomitant sleep problems did not permit definitive conclusions. This seems to be an appropriate conclusion, but needs to be considered against some limitations of the review, such as a lack of quality assessment and the pooling of very varied data.
INTRODUCTION: We present the first 7 cases of single site right hemicolectomy in Asia using the new Single Site Laparoscopy (SSL) access system from Ethicon Endo-surgery.
METHODS: Right hemicolectomy was performed using the new Single Site Laparoscopy (SSL) access system. Patient demographics, operative time, histology and post operative recovery and complications were collected and analysed.
RESULTS: The median operative time was 90 mins (range 60 - 150 mins) and a median wound size of 2.5 cm (range 2 to 4.5 cm). The median number of lymph nodes harvested was 24 (range 20 to 34 lymph nodes). The median length of proximal margin was 70 mm (range 30 to 145 mm) and that of distal margin was 50 mm (35 to 120 mm). All patients had a median hospital stay of 7 days (range 5 to 11) and there were no significant perioperative complications except for 1 patient who had a minor myocardial event.
CONCLUSION: Right hemicolectomy using SSL access system is feasible and safe for oncologic surgery.

CRD SUMMARY: This review found that for shoulder impingement syndrome, physiotherapist-led exercises and surgery appeared to be equally effective in the long-term. Home-based exercises appeared to be as effective as combined physiotherapy interventions. Passive treatments did not appear to be effective. Trials differed widely and there was insufficient high-quality evidence to reach definite conclusions. This judgement appears to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that calcium supplements (without co-administered vitamin D) were associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction. Overall, the authors' conclusions reflected the evidence presented and appear likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that there was insufficient evidence to established the effectiveness of physiotherapy exercise following primary hip replacement for osteoarthritis. The authors' cautious conclusions were supported by the results, but should be interpreted with some caution due to questions relating to the analysis.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors of this review claimed to confirm the important role of diet and exercise in short- and long-term weight loss. Although the conclusions appeared self-evident, they did not follow directly from the results presented, which compared diet and exercise to diet alone.
CRD SUMMARY: The review found needlescopic appendectomy comparable to laparoscopic appendectomy for hospital stay and perioperative complications, but associated with a longer duration of surgery and a higher conversion rate. The authors' conclusion reflected the evidence presented, but given the small number of included trials of poor methodological quality and with small sample sizes, the reliability of their conclusion is uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found some suggestion that negative pressure wound therapy may improve wound healing in comparison with conventional therapy, but further studies are required to prove an additional clinical benefit. These cautious conclusions appear valid and adequately consider the paucity of data, differences between the included studies and their poor quality.
CRD SUMMARY: There was no evidence of a protective role for statin treatment on incident diabetes and some evidence of a small but significant increase in risk; further research was warranted. The authors' cautious conclusions reflected the evidence presented and can be considered reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that statin therapy for an average period of 3.7 years did not significantly reduce all-cause mortality in a high-risk primary prevention population. The authors acknowledged certain limitations with the included trials and statistical analyses. Despite the potential for bias in the review, the authors' conclusions appear to reflect the evidence, based on a large sample population.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that statin therapy was associated with a slightly increased risk of development of diabetes, but the risk was low both in absolute terms and in relation to the reduction in coronary events. The authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review investigated effectiveness of statins for treatment of sepsis. The authors concluded that statins had a beneficial effect on the outcome of infection, but could not make firm conclusions due to the poor quality of available data. This was an appropriate conclusion and is likely to be reliable.
We prospectively compared the incidence of ventriculitis associated with external ventricular drains (EVD) impregnated with clindamycin and rifampicin with historical controls. We found the use of antibiotic impregnated (AI) EVDs showed a significant decrease in positive cerebrospinal fluid cultures and a significant delay in time to EVD infection.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that low-dose aspirin therapy reduced the incidence of adverse cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality in patients with stable cardiovascular disease, but increased the risk of severe bleeding. The authors' conclusion reflected the evidence presented, but poor reporting of the review methods and potential for language bias made the reliability of the authors' conclusion unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that BTX-A may be a treatment option for urinary incontinence in patients with MS or SCI; adverse events limited the applicability of Capsaicin. The ideal patient, dose and interval of use, and the long-term effectiveness were uncertain. Although the authors' conclusions reflected the evidence presented, methodological limitations made the reliability of the conclusions unclear.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the evidence for the use of topical antimicrobials for patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. The reviewers concluded that the treatment was effective in the management of chronic rhinosinusitis. Methodological weaknesses, limited reporting of the review process and the poor quality of the extracted data precluded a thorough evaluation of the reliability of the reviewer's conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: The review concluded that cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine can result in statistically significant but clinically marginal improvement in measures of cognition and global assessment in patients with dementia. This review was generally well conducted and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that multimodality monitoring including near-infrared spectroscopy may be a useful adjunct to care, but evidence for improvements in neurological outcome was lacking. Aspects of the review were poorly reported and it had some methodological problems, but the caution of the conclusions means that they are probably reliable, despite these concerns.
CRD SUMMARY: This review examined the effectiveness of one and two doses of different mumps vaccine strains on outbreaks of mumps in vaccinated populations. The authors concluded that more effective mumps vaccines were needed. Given the types of studies included, the reliability of their results is unknown, but the authors' broad conclusions appear to reflect the results.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that bisphosphonates may improve the healing of Charcot foot when added to standard interventions to control the position and shape of the foot. The review was generally well conducted but, given the small number of included studies, small sample sizes and variation between the studies, the authors' conclusions should be treated with caution. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review reported that topical application of chlorhexidine is useful for preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients. This was a well-conducted review, but the conclusions should have been slightly more cautious given the clinical and statistical differences between the studies and the unknown quality of some of the included trials.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that granulocyte colony-stimulating factor was associated with small but significant improvements in left ventricular ejection fraction in patients with acute myocardial infarction at 3 to 12 months' follow-up. The treatment was generally well tolerated in these patients. This was a generally well-conducted review, but the reliability of the authors' conclusions remains unclear given the differences between the studies. 
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that despite methodological flaws and limitations, randomised controlled trials of end-of-life (EOL) care suggest that home- or community-based interventions compare favourably with conventional hospital or medical care. The review findings are supported by the data provided, but the unclear review methodology and the poor quality of the review data suggest that they should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of rapid maxillary expansion on long-term transverse, anteroposterior and vertical skeletal changes. The authors concluded that evidence was limited and further research is required. The review was limited by poor reporting of the review methods and study details but, overall, conclusions about the limitations of the evidence and need for further research seem appropriate.
CRD SUMMARY: This review compared the effectiveness of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (NCRT) followed by surgery with surgery alone for patients with oesophageal cancer. The authors concluded that NCRT was associated with a small nonsignificant improvement in survival, but further research is needed. Limitations in review methods and reporting mean that it is not possible to independently endorse these conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review concluded that the use of tranexamic acid was effective in reducing the requirements of allogeneic blood transfusion for patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty. These conclusions needed to be interpreted in light of the fact that the included studies differed on key characteristics and other relevant studies might have been missed.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy and safety of atypical antipsychotics in patients with psychological and behavioural symptoms of dementia. The authors concluded that clinicians require more information for making decisions. The evidence presented appears to support the conclusions, but poor reporting of review methods makes it difficult to confirm the robustness of these conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: The author concluded that the most effective method of promoting informed choice was unclear and that further research is required. The review was reported clearly and the author's conclusions appear to accurately reflect the data presented. However, potential limitations in the review methods mean that it is not possible to definitively confirm the reliability of the conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed workplace rehabilitation interventions for work-related upper extremity disorders (WRUEDs). The authors concluded that there was insufficient evidence to adequately assess workplace interventions for WRUEDs and that further research is required. The included studies were small and of poor quality. The authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the adverse effects on infants of in utero exposure to serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SRIs) during the last trimester of pregnancy. The authors concluded that SRI exposure may result in a mild, self-limited neonatal behavioural syndrome. The conclusions are reasonable, although there were some methodological weaknesses in the conduct of the review.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of using oral retinoids to prevent skin cancers in recipients of solid organ transplants. The authors concluded that limited data from a few small studies suggest that acitretin may prevent new skin cancers, but the drug is poorly tolerated. This was a well-conducted review and the authors' cautious conclusions reflect the limited evidence.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the efficacy of statins in reducing blood cholesterol. The authors concluded that statins reduced total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and hence were effective for the primary and secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. The potential for selection bias and the pooling of seemingly clinically diverse data make the reliability of the results uncertain.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effects of statins on stroke. The authors concluded that statins reduce low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and may reduce the incidence of any type of stroke. Given that the review methods and study quality were not reported, and that the search for individual studies was limited, it is difficult to comment on the strength of the evidence underpinning the authors' conclusions.
CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed the effectiveness and safety of soy products for the treatment of perimenopausal symptoms such as hot flushes. The authors concluded that soy products are safe to use in the short-term and that there was some evidence that they were effective, though definitive conclusions were not possible. The authors' conclusions are appropriate, but it should be noted that many of the studies found no evidence of effectiveness.
The use of ultrasound guidance has proven to be a key factor in performing embryo transfer in a gentle and atraumatic manner. However, despite the lower incidence of brusque maneuvers, bladder distension has not shown any positive impact on the IVF success rate.
Gemeprost (Cervagem) has been used widely compared with Misoprostol (Cytotec) alone in second trimester pregnancy termination. This prospective randomised trial was to evaluate the efficacy of intravaginal Misoprostol (alone) and Gemeprost in second trimester termination of pregnancy. A total of 54 women with 27 on each arm were involved. A total of 25 patients (92.6%) in the Misoprostol group and 22 patients (81.5%) in the Gemeprost group delivered within 48 h. The Misoprostol group delivered earlier, although average number of tablets required were similar. The side-effects were not significant between the two groups in fact, but there was more pyrexia in the Gemeprost group (p = 0.004). Misoprostol in second trimester termination of pregnancy is clinically as effective and less costly than the standard regimen of Gemeprost.
The aim of this study was to compare the efficiency of polypropylene mesh surgery with the site-specific repair surgeries in the treatment of cystocoeles. We randomized 90 patients into two groups according to a computer-based program. After a 12-month (mean) follow up, we noticed that the polypropylene mesh surgery yielded good anatomical results. Acceptable anatomical cure rates were 91 and 72% in the mesh surgery group and site-specific surgery group, respectively. There were three cases (6.9%) of mesh erosion. One case of urinary retention and two cases of de novo dyspareunia were seen in the mesh surgery group. De novo stress urinary incontinence developed in three patients in the site-specific surgery group. We concluded that surgery with light polypropylene mesh (Sofradim, Parietene) is superior to the site-specific surgery in the treatment of cystocoeles.
We examined the impact of New York State's public reporting system for coronary artery bypass surgery fifteen years after its launch. We found that users who picked a top-performing hospital or surgeon from the latest available report had approximately half the chance of dying as did those who picked a hospital or surgeon from the bottom quartile. Nevertheless, performance was not associated with a subsequent change in market share. Surgeons with the highest mortality rates were much more likely than other surgeons to retire or leave practice after the release of each report card.
This study builds on earlier work by assessing the long-term impact of a public hospital performance report on both consumers and hospitals. In doing so, we shed light on the relative importance of alternative assumptions about what stimulates quality improvements. The findings indicate that making performance data public results in improvements in the clinical area reported upon. An earlier investigation indicated that hospitals included in the public report believed that the report would affect their public image. Indeed, consumer surveys suggest that inclusion did affect hospitals' reputations.
The objective of this study was to identify factors associated with new onset of postpartum fecal incontinence in primiparous women. A population-based study was conducted that surveyed all women delivering between 2002 and 2003 in Oregon. Factors associated with fecal incontinence were identified using logistic regression analysis. A total of 6,152 primiparous women completed the survey 3-6 months postpartum with 2,482 reporting a new onset of fecal incontinence (FI) after childbirth. Vaginal delivery was associated with a greater risk of FI compared to cesarean (odds ratio = 1.45; 95% confidence interval, 1.29 to 1.64). However, vaginal delivery without laceration or instrument assistance did not increase the risk of FI over cesarean. Being overweight (body mass index >/=30 kg/m(2)), pushing for greater than 2 h, and constipation were independently associated with postpartum FI (p < 0.05) regardless of route of delivery. This study provides important data to inform counseling and management of primiparous women.
The computerized medical record program, CLINIC, specifically designed at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev to be used on-line in a primary care clinic during a patient encounter by healthcare professionals, has been in use for over 6 years in two community clinics. In order to analyse the effectiveness and use of CLINIC, four physicians were video recorded during working sessions before and after the introduction of CLINIC. While using CLINIC did not change the total mean encounter time, the lengths of the encounter components and record use did change. The physicians' work style changed from a 'conversational pattern' (continuous data recording) to a 'blocked pattern' (data entry at intervals).

CRD SUMMARY: This review assessed computed tomographic angiography for the evaluation of coronary artery bypass grafts. The authors concluded that single-slice computed tomography (CT) can be used to detect graft patency but not occlusion, while 4- and 16-slice CT can be used for the detection of both occlusion and patency. However, the findings should be interpreted with caution given the limitations of the review, in particular the lack of any formal quality assessment.
CRD SUMMARY: This review found that serum immunoglobulin G4 serum levels were good markers for autoimmune pancreatitis and should be incorporated in its diagnostic workup. These conclusions should be interpreted with extreme caution given the possibility of missing studies, failure to assess study quality and heterogeneity between studies.
Intravenous metoprolol was found to be significantly more effective than placebo in preventing head-up tilt-table induced neurally mediated syncope. The reproducibility of acute tilt-table testing is only 63% and suggests caution in the interpretation of acute drug testing during tilt-table studies.

Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) occurred in 16 of 37 antiretroviral-naive patients who were treated subsequently for tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1 infection. IRIS was related to increases in the CD4 cell percentage and in the ratio of CD4 cells to CD8 cells after 1 month of antiretroviral therapy and to dissemination of tuberculosis. These results have implications for the diagnosis of IRIS and the understanding of its pathogenesis.
A study was designed to compare an avidity index method to the serologic testing algorithm for recent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seroconversion (STARHS) for the detection of recent HIV infection. One hundred sixty HIV-positive sera were tested. Both techniques performed similarly in identifying recent infections, although STARHS tended to misclassify more individuals that had long-standing infection as being recently infected.
This study aims to determine whether the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system can influence American Society for Reproductive Medicine endometriosis staging scores, as assessed through second-look laparoscopies, and to compare the results with those obtained with a GnRH agonist. Both treatments reduced the extent of pelvic endometriotic lesions in patients with chronic pelvic pain.
Fifty consecutive episodes of fever in neutropenic children with malignant disease or aplastic anaemia were randomized to treatment with either ceftazidime alone or a combination of azlocillin and tobramycin, pending the results of bacteriological investigation. More than 90% of organisms isolated from these episodes were sensitive to ceftazidime, which appears to be a non-toxic alternative to aminoglycosides in such circumstances.

The analgesic efficacy of flurbiprofen 25 mg and 50 mg compared with aspirin 650 mg and placebo (lactose) was evaluated. Subjects were 164 dental outpatients undergoing the surgical removal of impacted teeth. Each subject received a single dose of study medication and was evaluated hourly for six hours. Aspirin was superior to placebo in all measures of analgesic efficacy, and both dosages of flurbiprofen were superior to aspirin.

CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that neoadjuvant chemotherapy could improve tumour stage and survival rates in patients with locally advanced stomach cancer and had a good safety profile. The review findings were based on data from trials of diverse design and cointerventions, so they should be interpreted with caution.
CRD SUMMARY: The authors concluded that the evidence, specifically of long-term effectiveness and/or safety, was insufficient to justify widespread use of total disc replacement over fusion for single-level degenerative disc. The authors' conclusions reflect the evidence presented and are likely to be reliable.
CRD SUMMARY: Tight glycaemic control with intensive insulin therapy was associated with a higher incidence of hypoglycaemia and an increased risk of death in patients who did not receive most of their calories intravenously. In general, the review was well conducted and the authors' conclusions are likely to be reliable.
The article reviews a team effort to reduce operating room costs by 25 percent. The team achieved this goal by participating in the Institute for Healthcare Improvement Breakthrough Series on adult cardiac surgery. The process improvements included standardizing practices, reevaluating equipment, and reducing operating room cycle time.
We performed a prospective study to determine whether flexible flatfoot in children can be influenced by treatment. One hundred and twenty-nine children who had been referred by pediatricians, and for whom the radiographic findings met the criteria for flatfoot, were randomly assigned to one of four groups: Group I, controls; Group II, treatment with corrective orthopaedic shoes; Group III, treatment with a Helfet heel-cup; or Group IV, treatment with a custom-molded plastic insert. All of the patients in Groups II, III, and IV had a minimum of three years of treatment, and ninety-eight patients whose compliance with the protocol was documented completed the study. Analysis of radiographs before treatment and at the most recent follow-up demonstrated a significant improvement in all groups (p less than 0.01), including the controls, and no significant difference between the controls and the treated patients (p greater than 0.4). We concluded that wearing corrective shoes or inserts for three years does not influence the course of flexible flatfoot in children.
Following a study in which the etiology of nearly 70% of 142 cases of pneumonia in children could be determined using a combination of bacteriological and serological methods, the effect of erythromycin ethylsuccinate was compared with that of amoxicillin in a randomized study on 120 cases of pneumonia. We first examined the tracheal secretion microbiologically and determined other serological parameters and clinical data. The tracheal secretion was sterile in only 19% of the cases. We were able to identify the etiology in 64% of the cases using a combination of microbiological and serological methods. A discontinuation of therapy and acceptable side-effects were considerably more frequent with amoxicillin than with erythromycin ethylsuccinate (75 mg/kg body weight). The advantages of erythromycin, especially for the initial therapy of pneumonia, and the improvements in diagnosis resulting from the examination of the tracheal secretion will be discussed.
The efficacy of 20% azelaic acid cream and 4% hydroquinone cream, both used in conjunction with a broad-spectrum sunscreen, against melasma was investigated in a 24-week, double-blind study with 329 women. Over the treatment period the azelaic acid cream yielded 65% good or excellent results; no significant treatment differences were observed with regard to overall rating, reduction in lesion size, and pigmentary intensity. Severe side effects such as allergic sensitization or exogenous ochronosis were not observed with azelaic acid.
A double-blind study comparing a broad-spectrum sunscreen agent with its vehicle in the treatment of melasma was performed in fifty-three patients who were concomitantly using a depigmentating solution. In this study, 96.2 percent of those who used the sunscreen agent showed improvement as compared with 80.7 percent of those who used placebo. These results confirm the positive role of sun protection in the treatment of melasma and also establish hydroquinone as a major therapeutic agent in pigmentary disorders.
Ten well-nourished children with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) were randomly assigned to groups that received (a) total parenteral nutrition (TPN) throughout the period of induction therapy or (b) standard nutritional support. Body mass and skin hypersensitivity reactions were better maintained in experimental patients. Patients on TPN had higher total white blood counts, absolute granulocyte counts, and platelet counts than did control patients during the course. No difference was apparent in the frequency of febrile episodes, or other aspects of the patients' courses. This preliminary report suggests that intensive nutritional support may accelerate the recovery of normal marrow function during induction therapy for ANLL.
BACKGROUND: Smokers have a higher risk of complicated tissue and wound healing after surgery than nonsmokers. We tested the hypothesis that short-term pre-operative cessation of smoking in colorectal surgery decreases the incidence of postoperative tissue and wound complications. METHODS: From February 1998 to March 2001, 60 patients, who smoked daily, undergoing colorectal resection were randomly assigned 2-3 weeks before scheduled surgery to either abstinence from smoking, counselling and nicotine replacement therapy or maintenance of daily smoking habits. Postoperative tissue and wound complications necessitating surgical or medical treatment were evaluated at discharge and 30 days after surgery by blinded outcome assessment. RESULTS: In the pre-operative period of 15 days (8-24) (median, interquartile range (IQR)), 89% of the patients in the intervention group vs. 13% in the control group abstained from smoking or reduced by more than half (P < 0.05). In the postoperative period of 11 days (10-13), the corresponding figures were 92% and 50%, respectively (P < 0.05). Postoperative tissue and wound complications occurred in 33% (9 of 27) of the patients in the intervention group compared to 27% (8 of 30) in the control group (NS). Likewise, no difference in overall postoperative complication rate was found between the groups. CONCLUSION: Short-term cessation of smoking does not reduce the risk of complicated tissue and wound healing or other complications in colorectal surgery.
Thirty-six subjects participated in an 18-month follow-up of a secondary prevention program for back pain of recent onset. The follow-up assessment included most of the same instruments used in the original study. In addition, interviews were conducted to ascertain help and hindrance factors for maintaining improvements during the follow-up period. Results showed that subjects had significantly less pain, used fewer medications, and were more active at 18-month follow-up than at baseline. All subjects had returned to work, and one third had no pain-related work absences during the follow-up. A cost-benefit analysis indicated substantial economic savings when follow-up sick-listing data were compared with estimates based on an increasing trend for pain-related absenteeism found during the baseline period. Hindrance factors reported by subjects were related to personal time-management and workplace factors, especially psychosocial aspects of the work environment. It was concluded that the secondary prevention program was effective and that future maintenance programs should focus more on personal time-management and workplace factors.
Seventy-four chronic low back pain patients in a study assessing the effectiveness of group outpatient cognitive-behavioral and operant behavioral treatment completed the Coping Strategy Questionnaire (CSQ) and measures of pain, depression, and functional disability pre- and post-treatment. The previously reported factor structure of the CSQ was generally replicated, and significant associations were found between use of ignoring and reinterpretation strategies and downtime, between use of attention diversion strategies and pain intensity, and between tendency to catastrophize and physical and psychosocial impairment. Both treatments resulted in significant changes in types of coping strategies used to deal with pain. Increased use of praying and hoping strategies was significantly related to decreases in pain intensity. Decreased catastrophizing was also significantly related to decreases in pain intensity, as well as to decreases in physical and psychosocial impairment.
Sixty-six chronic low back pain sufferers were randomly divided into three groups. Following individual assessments consisting of psychological questionnaires, pain monitoring, and measurement of paraspinal electromyogram (EMG), one group received paraspinal EMG biofeedback and another a placebo treatment. The third group received no intervention. Two further assessments were carried out on all groups immediately after treatment and at a 3-month follow-up. All groups showed significant reduction in pain, anxiety, depression, and paraspinal EMG following treatment and at follow-up, but there were no differences between groups. A regression analysis failed to identify subjects' characteristics that predicted positive outcome in the biofeedback group. However, high scores on the Evaluative scale of the McGill Pain Questionnaire and high hypnotizability were significant predictors of positive outcome for the placebo group. It is concluded that paraspinal EMG biofeedback is not a specific treatment for chronic low back pain in a nonhospitalized population.
Twenty chronic low back pain (LBP) patients with relatively high standing paraspinal EMG levels (greater than 5 microV) were randomly assigned to 2 groups. One group (N = 10) received EMG biofeedback training to reduce standing paraspinal EMG levels, the other group (N = 10) served as a waiting list control group. Changes in perceived pain (duration X intensity) and paraspinal EMG in standing position were measured at a 3 week pretreatment baseline, during the 3 week treatment period, and at a 3 week post-treatment baseline. Compared to patients in the waiting list control group, those who received EMG biofeedback showed a significant decrease in standing paraspinal EMG from pretreatment to post-treatment baseline. However, no significant differences in reported pain were found during these periods. It is concluded that reduction of standing paraspinal EMG does not lead to reduction in pain.
Chronic low back pain (CLBP) presents a problem of massive dimensions. While inpatient approaches have been evaluated, outpatient treatment programs have received relatively little examination. Hypnosis and relaxation are two powerful techniques amenable to outpatient use. Seventeen outpatient subjects suffering from CLBP were assigned to either Self-Hypnosis (n = 9) or Relaxation (n = 8) treatments. Following pretreatment assessment, all subjects attended a single placebo session in which they received minimal EMG feedback. One week later the subjects began eight individual weekly treatment sessions. Subjects were assessed on a number of dependent variables at pretreatment, following the placebo phase, one week after the completion of treatment, and three months after treatment ended. Subjects in both groups showed significant decrements in such measures as average pain rating, pain as measured by derivations from the McGill Pain Questionnaire, level of depression, and length of pain analog line. Self-Hypnosis subjects reported less time to sleep onset, and physicians rated their use of medication as less problematic after treatment. While both treatments were effective, neither proved superior to the other. The placebo treatment produced nonsignificant improvement.
Radiotherapy given during treatment of oral and pharyngeal malignancy is frequently associated with colonization of the oral mucosa by Candida species. Treatment of these infections has included topical and systemic agents. In the present study 73 patients with oropharyngeal candidosis were treated with either amphotericin B (10 mg lozenges, four times daily for 14 days, 36 patients) or fluconazole (50 mg daily for 7 days, 37 patients). The yeasts most frequently isolated were C albicans and C glabrata. Clinical signs and symptoms showed improvement at end of treatment in 72% of patients who received amphotericin B compared with 92% of patients who received fluconazole. Mycological cure at end of treatment was achieved in 31% of the amphotericin B group and 46% of patients who received fluconazole. For both treatments the cure rate was less in denture wearers than in non denture wearers.
Optimal therapy for oropharyngeal candidiasis, a common infection in immunocompromised patients, has yet to be clearly defined. Topical therapy is usually poorly tolerated; ketoconazole is effective but absorption is highly variable. New antifungal agents have been developed to increase the therapeutic options. Fluconazole is active against yeasts, is available in both oral and intravenous formulations, and has a pharmacokinetic profile different from that of ketoconazole. This randomized double-blind study evaluates systemic antifungal therapy with fluconazole (100 mg daily) or ketoconazole (400-mg daily) for oropharyngeal candidiasis in patients with cancer. Clinical cure was observed in 15 of 19 and 14 of 18 patients treated with fluconazole and ketoconazole, respectively. Eradication of pathogenic yeasts ws documented for 10 patients in both groups. The rates of relapse were similar, but relapse occurred earlier in patients in the ketoconazole group. Overall, this study demonstrates the value of a dosage of 100 mg of fluconazole or of 400 mg of ketoconazole daily for the management of oropharyngeal candidiasis in patients with cancer.
A double-blind controlled study was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of clotrimazole in the treatment of oral candidiasis in patients with neoplastic disease. Six of seven patients who received clotrimazole had resolution of symptoms and signs of oral candidiasis. In five of six patients who received placebo, clinical progression of signs and symptoms occurred, esophagitis developed, and amphotericin B therapy had to be given. No toxicity was observed that could be attributed to clotrimazole. The results were statistically significant (p = 0.025 by Fisher's exact test). Clotrimazole is effective therapy for oral candidiasis in patients with neoplastic disease, and may prevent the development of esophagitis.
A randomized double-blind trial was conducted to assess the local effectiveness and safety of a troche form of clotrimazole in the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in cancer patients. One half of the patients received one 10-mg troche and the other half received one 50-mg troche, five times a day for two weeks. Clinical cures were observed in 50 episodes, resulting in a cure rate of 96%. The median duration of oropharyngeal candidiasis after the start of therapy was three days in those treated with the 50-mg troche and four days in those who had received the 10-mg troche. Side effects were minimal, and only one patient experienced nausea and abdominal pain. Both the 10-mg and 50-mg troches appear to be efficacious and safe, but the 50-mg dose may be preferable because it is somewhat more effective without additional toxicity.
A randomized comparison group pretest-posttest experimental design was used to quantitatively determine the effects of environmental control measures on patients with allergic rhinitis. Environmental controls included wrapping the mattress with a vinyl cover, washing the top bedding cover with 55 degrees C hot water every two weeks, removal of soft furniture, and wet cleaning of the bedroom floor every day. Thirty subjects were randomly assigned to experimental and control groups. The amount of house dust mites in dust samples collected from the bedroom floor, bedding and mattress, as well as the nasal symptoms of patients, were measured twice at one-month intervals. A significant decrease in house dust mites in dust samples and relief in patients' nasal symptoms were observed in the experimental group who had environmental controls.
Venous volume (venous capacity) of the calf is low in patients with acute myocardial infarction, who also have a high risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The effect of graduated compression stockings on the venous volume and on the incidence of DVT was therefore studied in 80 patients aged 70 years and above with acute myocardial infarction. Graduated compression stockings were randomly fitted to one leg, the other serving as a control, after which the venous volume was measured by strain gauge plethysmography. The incidence of DVT was measured by the 125I fibrinogen uptake test. Venous volume was significantly higher in legs treated with graduated compression stockings compared to control legs. DVT developed in eight control legs but not in any leg treated with graduated compression stockings (P = 0.003). DVT was also significantly more frequent in women compared to men and the majority of DVT developed in legs with very low venous volume values.
Two hundred and forty-five patients who underwent acute extensive abdominal operations were randomized into three regimens to achieve optimal prophylaxis of postoperative thromboembolic complications. All of the patients were screened by the 125I-fibrinogen uptake test for seven days and if the phlebographic findings were positive. Of 81 patients receiving low dose heparin, 12 had thromboembolism. Of 79 receiving a combination of low dose heparin and graded compression stockings, two had thromboembolism, and of 85 receiving a combination of dextran and graded compression stockings, 13 had this complication. This difference is significant in favor of the second treatment (p = 0.013). It is concluded that the combination of low dose heparin and graded compression stockings is an effective way to prevent thromboembolism after acute abdominal operations.
The incidence of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was assessed in a series of 78 patients undergoing major surgical operations to compare the prophylactic effectiveness of intermittent sequential pneumatic compression alone with the simultaneous use of graduated compression stockings and intermittent sequential pneumatic compression. The diagnosis of DVT was determined with the I-125 fibrinogen-uptake test, Doppler ultrasound, maximum venous outflow by strain-gauge plethysmography, and contrast venography. The incidence of DVT in nonstockinged legs was 9% while that in the stockinged legs was 1%. The simultaneous use of graduated elastic compression stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression is more effective than pneumatic compression alone in the prevention of postoperative DVT.
We studied 80 patients who were older than 50 years of age to determine if graded elastic compression stockings reduced the frequency of postoperative thrombosis in patients undergoing dextran 70 prophylaxis. All of the patients received a total of 2,000 mL of dextran 70 during three days; according to a random table, each of the patients had one leg encased in a graded compression stocking for one week. Thrombosis development was screened with the fibrinogen I 125 test. Eight patients manifested thrombosis-one in the thigh and seven in the calf--localized to the unstockinged leg, a frequency significantly greater than the zero frequency in the stockinged leg. No untoward effects of this combination prophylaxis were noted.
The efficacy of graduated compression stockings in the prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) after major gynaecological surgery was investigated in a controlled randomized prospective trial in 196 patients who were greater than 35 years of age. The stockings were worn by 104 of the 196 patients throughout their stay in hospital, the other 92 patients did not wear the stockings (control group). All the patients were scanned for DVT postoperatively with the 125I-labelled fibrinogen test. None of the 104 patients who wore the stockings developed a thromboembolism, but four of the 92 control patients who did not wear the stockings had DVT. This difference between the two groups was statistically significant.
A prospective, randomized trial of the effect of graded compression of the calf was done in 62 patients operated on electively for hip disease. After total hip arthroplasty, compression reduced the number of positive fibrinogen uptake tests by two-thirds, significant only in males, who seem to run a higher risk of thrombosis than females.
Some reports have suggested that influenza virus vaccine is less effective in persons that have received prior annual vaccination(s) than in those receiving it for the first time. This issue was addressed by evaluating the efficacy of annual influenza vaccinations over a 5 year period in healthy adults employing commercially-available, inactivated whole-virus vaccine. Influenza vaccination had minimal effects on overall respiratory illnesses during epidemic periods. However, it reduced influenza virus shedding by an average of 38.8% and conferred protection against influenza virus infection during each epidemic. Some variation in infection rates were noted between vaccine groups given one or more than one annual immunization, and between years, but no consistent pattern of differences was noted in relation to number of successive years of vaccination. These results suggest that the current recommendation for annual influenza vaccination of persons at special risk of serious disease and complications is appropriate, but that continued efforts to improve the effectiveness of our prophylactic measures against influenza are needed.
This study evaluated the safety, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy of vaccines containing purified recombinant uncleaved hemagglutinin (rHA0) from influenza A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2) virus. In a randomized, double-blinded trial, 127 adult volunteers were immunized with 15 micrograms of rHA0, 15 micrograms of rHA0 plus alum, 90 micrograms of rHA0, licensed subvirion vaccine, or saline placebo. The rHA0 vaccines caused fewer local adverse reactions than did the commercial subvirion preparation. Neutralizing hemagglutinin-specific antibody responses to 15 micrograms of rHA0 were comparable to those elicited by licensed vaccine, not enhanced by the addition of alum, and significantly increased by raising the rHA0 dose from 15 to 90 micrograms. Compared with placebo recipients, rHA0-vaccinated subjects had significantly lower rates of influenza A (H3N2) virus infection and illness during the epidemic winter season. These results suggest that influenza vaccines containing purified rHA0 may offer an advantage over licensed preparations containing egg-grown antigens by inducing equivalent protective immune responses while being potentially less reactogenic.
A comparative evaluation of immunological and epidemiological effectiveness of commercial live and killed vaccine preparations used simultaneously or separately was first carried out in simultaneous field trials of various methods of influenza vaccine prevention in a human population of 10,449 subjects. The advantage of simultaneous immunization was confirmed by immunological parameters and protective effect in the period of influenza A epidemic of 1983. The correlation of immunological and epidemiological effectiveness of influenza vaccines in joint or separate administration is discussed.
A cold recombinant live influenza B virus vaccine was tested in man. In comparison to a placebo, reactogenicity attributable to virus infection was slight or moderate. No revertant viruses were shed, and there was no evidence of transmission to the placebo group who were housed in close contact with the vaccinees. Serological responses to initial inoculation were moderate; 60% of vaccinees showing twofold increases in serum hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) titers gave a geometric mean titer (GMT) of 1:13. Three weeks after the first vaccination, both the vaccine and the placebo group were revaccinated with homologous live virus vaccine. The group previously given vaccine was resistant to reinfection as judged from clinical reactions and virus shedding and the GMT increased only slightly to 1:16.3. In contrast, the former placebo group responded; mild symptoms were seen, the majority shed viruses and 50% showed twofold increases in serum HAI titers to a geometric mean titer of 1:17.4.
A live, attenuated influenza B virus vaccine was evaluated in a group of students. The virus, cold-recombinant (CR) 7, was produced by recombining the attenuated cold-adapted parent, B/Ann Arbor/1/66, with a wild strain, B/Hong Kong/8/73. In ferrets, the wild strain produced histopathologic lesions in the lungs, whereas the CR strain and the attenuated parent did not. A total of 306 individuals was inoculated intranasally with either the CR virus or a placebo. After inoculation, only one symptom was significantly more common in the vaccinees than in the control subjects. That symptom, sore throat, occurred briefly in 26% of the vaccine recipients and in 10.5% of the placebo recipients. An outbreak of influenza B occurred three months after vaccination. When serologic infection rates in the two groups were compared, it was found that the vaccine had been significantly effective (P less than 0.01) in preventing infection.
Immunization with an influenza subunit vaccine given in one dose about 1 month to 2 months before onset of an epidemic of influenza afforded from 80% to 90% protection in a double-blind clinical trial which was supported by isolation of virus and serological studies. In the vaccinated group, 20% failed to develop antibodies to the vaccine. Either serology tests or attempted isolation of virus alone would have failed to detect some of the cases.
The "R-75" strain live, attenuated, serum inhibitor-resistant influenza B vaccine was administered intranasally by drops in two doses 14 days apart to 21 volunteers. Each vaccinee was paired with a close associate (roommate or workmate) who similarly received two doses of a placebo solution. Although about 50% of both vaccine and placebo recipients complained of symptoms after dosage, the severity of symptoms was greater in vaccine recipients. Fourfold serum hemagglutination-inhibiting antibody titer rises occurred in 38% of vaccine recipients, and four vaccines had fourfold titer rises of nasal hemagglutination-inhibiting antibody. Vaccine virus was isolated from three asymptomatic vaccine recipients. There was no virological or serological evidence of the vaccine virus spreading to placebo recipients.
Haemagglutinating inhibiting antibody (HAI) responses were determined and clinical reactions recorded in 162 adult volunteers who received either 1 or 2 intranasal doses of 10(7-0) EID50 WRL 105 strain live influenza vaccine or placebo. After administration of a single dose of vaccine significant antibody responses were obtained in 69 (70%) of 98 volunteers with initial antibody titres of less than or equal to 1/20. Of the 70 volunteers who received a second dose of vaccine, 62 provided a further post-vaccination sample of serum, and only 3 (4-8%), who had not responded to the first dose of vaccine, produced a significant antibody response. Local, upper respiratory and constitutional symptoms were recorded more frequently after the administration of a first dose of vaccine than after placebo or a second dose of vaccine. The symptoms were of a minor nature except in one volunteer who, after the first dose of vaccine, developed influenzal symptoms followed by bronchitis.
A previous study found that early intravenous indomethacin administration prolonged respiratory support in very low birth weight infants. We have, therefore, designed a randomized, double blind controlled study to evaluate the oxygenation, and surfactant requirements in preterm low birth weight infants receiving early indomethacin administration. Premature neonates who received surfactant therapy and on mechanical ventilation were prospectively randomized to receive either placebo or indomethacin (0.2 mg/kg intravenously at 12 postnatal hours and every 24 h for two more doses). Oxygenation was assessed by FiO2 required and arterial/alveolar oxygen (a/A O2) ratio during the first 48 h of life. The doses of surfactant were compared between the two groups. Twenty-seven infants (n = 14 of early indomethacin and n = 13 of placebo group) fulfilled inclusion criteria. At admission to the study, there were no differences in the birth weight, gestational age, sex, Apgar scores, a/A O2 ratio, and FiO2. The control group exhibited a significant improvement in oxygenation (FiO2 requirement and a/A O2 compared with the early indomethacin group at 24 (P = 0.026 and 0.02, respectively) and 48 h of life (P = 0.037 and 0.026, respectively). The requirement of surfactant was significantly larger in the early indomethacin group (P = 0.029). Early indomethacin administration increases oxygen and surfactant requirement.
We enrolled 61 neonates of 600 to 1250 gm birth weight with evidence of low-grade intraventricular hemorrhage at 6 to 11 hours of age in a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to test the hypothesis that indomethacin (0.1 mg/kg given intravenously at 6 to 12 postnatal hours and every 24 hours for two more doses) would prevent extension of intraventricular hemorrhage. Twenty-seven infants were assigned to receive indomethacin; 34 infants received saline placebo. There were no significant differences between the two groups in birth weight, gestational age, sex, Apgar scores, percentage of infants treated with surfactant, or distribution of hemorrhages at the time of the first cranial sonogram (echo-encephalogram). Within the first 5 days, 9 of 27 indomethacin-treated and 12 of 34 saline solution-treated infants had extension of their initial intraventricular hemorrhage (p = 1.00). Four indomethacin-treated and three saline solution-treated infants had parenchymal extension of the hemorrhage. Indomethacin was associated with closure of a patent ductus arteriosus by the fifth day of life (p = 0.003). There were no differences in adverse events attributed to indomethacin. We conclude that in very low birth weight infants with low grade intraventricular hemorrhage within the first 6 postnatal hours, prophylactic indomethacin therapy promotes closure of the patent ductus arteriosus and is not associated with adverse events, but does not affect the cascade of events leading to parenchymal involvement of intracranial hemorrhage.
The results of a double blind study to evaluate the efficiency of prophylactic endovenous indomethacin versus placebo for prevention of intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) in newborn infants between 28 to 36 weeks of age who were intubated at the delivery room and required mechanical ventilation in NICU are presented. Fourty six patients required mechanical ventilation, but 14 neonates had IVH evaluated by ultrasound when were admitted to the Unit. At least 32 infants were studied, 16 for each group. There were no differences between the groups in weight, gestational age, sex and delivery way. The mobility was the same in relation to hialine membrane disease, sepsis, pneumonie and pneumotorax. The placebo group had more frequency of PDA and mortality (P < 0.5). There were no differences in mean airway pressure and arterial gases, also in glucose, platelets and urinary volume. The indomethacin group had mayor urinary density and FeNa but the results were always in normal ranges. The IVH was the same in both groups. We concluded that the indomethacin at the levels used did not produced alterations, and if the IVH is not prevented, were observed lesser severity of the same and the frequency of PDA and mortality are lesser. But still is necessary more number of cases for best conclusions.
Infants weighing 1500 g at birth requiring either intermittent positive pressure ventilation or continuous positive airway pressure by 12 hours of age were entered in a randomized double blind controlled trial to test the efficacy of early intravenous indomethacin therapy in preventing chronic pulmonary disease of prematurity. Of the 30 newborns enrolled, 15 were treated with indomethacin and 15 were treated with placebo at 12, 24 and 36 hours of age. The groups were similar for birth weight, gestational age, sex, hyaline membrane disease and intracranial hemorrhage. Infants in the placebo group were successfully weaned from intermittent positive pressure ventilation at an earlier age than infants in the indomethacin group (p less than 0.05). Furthermore, chronic pulmonary disease of prematurity was similar in the two groups despite a reduction in the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in the indomethacin group.
Indomethacin (0.2 mg/kg) or saline was given intravenously during the first 24 hours to 50 preterm infants in a double blind controlled trial. Eight of the control group later required treatment with indomethacin for clinical signs of left to right shunt, but only one in the treatment group (p = 0.03). Treatment with indomethacin prolonged bleeding time, raised serum creatinine concentrations, and was associated with gastrointestinal haemorrhage in seven infants. Five of these had a serum indomethacin concentration greater than 1.0 microgram/ml. There was a significant reduction of the stable metabolite of prostacyclin, 6-ketoprostaglandin F1 alpha, commencing six hours after treatment and lasting for four days. There was no significant difference in the incidence of intraventricular haemorrhage, days of treatment with oxygen or ventilation, or mortality between the two groups.
Nineteen women attending a special multiple pregnancy antenatal clinic with a triplet pregnancy were randomly allocated to either bed rest in hospital from 24 weeks gestation onwards until delivery, or to continue conventional outpatient management. Conclusions are limited by the trial size, but the study suggests that routine hospitalization for bed rest decreases the incidence of preterm delivery and light-for-gestational age infants and reduces the need for intensive neonatal care. Although still compatible with change variation, the observations, if confirmed in a larger randomized study, would have considerable implications for clinical practice. The policy needs further evaluation in a large multicentered collaborative study.
Women attending a twin pregnancy antenatal clinic underwent cervical palpation to calculate a cervical score by subtracting dilatation from length. Those with a score of -2 or less at or before 34 weeks are at especially high risk of preterm labour. A total of 139 such women were randomly allocated either to receive bed-rest in hospital or to continue conventional outpatient management. No beneficial effect of bed-rest could be identified in prolonging twin pregnancy or improving fetal outcome.
212 women with twin pregnancies were randomly allocated either to receive advice to rest in hospital from 32 weeks' gestation until delivery, or to be part of a control group in which hospital admission was offered selectively (and, on average, 5 weeks later). Preterm delivery was more common among women admitted routinely for bed rest than among controls, and this difference was unlikely to have occurred by chance. There is at present no scientifically acceptable evidence that this common, disruptive, and expensive obstetric policy does more good than harm.
OBJECTIVE: To reduce the prescribing of antibiotics in respiratory tract infections (RTI). DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: The Audit Odense model for registration and quality development was used for RTI. Twenty general practitioners registered their consultations for RTIs during 4 weeks in February-March (n = 1124) and November-December (n = 926) in 1995. Diagnosis, choice of antibiotics and diagnostic tools were registered. In between the two registrations an active intervention took place. Consultations for RTIs among 25 physicians (who had not participated in any intervention or follow-up discussion) served as a control. SETTING: General practice in southern Sweden. OUTCOME MEASURES: Prescribing of antibiotics before and after an intervention. RESULTS: The proportion of patients not receiving an antibiotic increased from the first to the second registration in both groups, in the intervention group from 45 to 55% (p < 0.001) and in the control group from 36 to 40% (p = 0.0298). The reduction was most evident in patients diagnosed with tonsillitis and bronchitis. This was in concordance with an increase in the use of desktop diagnostics (Strep A and CRP). CONCLUSION: These results indicate that it is possible to achieve a change in the utilisation of antibiotics in the treatment of RTIs and that the Audit Project Odense (APO) model could be a valuable tool.
This article reports on the characteristics of the individuals participating in Health Matters, a community-based health promotion and fitness program for the elderly. A total of 255 persons were recruited into the program. Eligibility criteria included having one or more qualifying chronic health conditions, being 65 or older, having membership in a participating health plan, and ownership of a CalPERS long-term care insurance policy. The intervention included nurse health coaching, training in self-management of chronic illness, referrals to community resources, and a fitness program. More than 90% of participants were in exercise programs at 12 months, and 30% had participated in one or more condition management classes. Health Matters' senior-oriented fitness program was more successful in attracting higher disability risk members than were either community-based or self-exercise programs. Health Matters demonstrated that it is possible to proactively recruit and retain individuals in a health-promotion program. The nurse coaches/case managers communicated with primary care physicians about the enrollees and their health action plans, but recruitment did not rely on physician referrals.
This study was designed to: (a) identify the perceptions of retirees about changes in their life patterns during retirement; (b) investigate the kinds of adjustment problems occurring in retirement as a basis for developing prevention oriented pre-retirement programs; and (c) identify extant factors which could demonstrate underlying themes relating to retirement adjustment. A 72-item, multiple response questionnaire was used to gather demographic data, information on use of time, pre-retirement planning, health problems, changing life patterns, and adjustment to retirement. It is the latter which is reported in these findings. The population included 1565 retirees from a designated company living in the south-eastern United States of America, with a response of 764 subjects (48.82%). Findings suggest the respondents were generally healthy and well adjusted; however, numerous adjustment problem areas were identified within the six life patterns. Additional factor analysis (principal components) demonstrated four factors of particular importance: satisfaction with retirement, retirement concerns, spousal relationships, and pre-retirement preparation outcomes.
The study purpose was to determine differences in number, type, and predictors of community-based service use among elders in three age groups. Existing data from a regional Area Agency on Aging were used and the sample (n = 2,474) included vulnerable elders, men, African Americans, low income, and rural residents. Services most frequently used were case management, congregate meal, home-delivered meal, outreach, and recreation. Differences existed among the young, middle, and old old age groups in the number and types of services used. Race, residence, transportation capability, payment source, and function were the most frequent predictors of use.
As little is known about how support assists individuals during a normative life transition, this qualitative, prospective study explored how women chose sources of informal support. Women having their first child, returning to work after an extended absence or recently retired from full-time employment were interviewed. Support during a life transition was described as having someone who would listen while the woman problem-solved. Women preferred to get their support from close family members or others experiencing a similar life transition. A number of barriers to the use of support were identified: perception that the use of support would be a burden on others, lack of reciprocity, reluctance to ask for support, and nonsupportive messages included within supportive actions. The transition often took more than 2 years to complete and, for a subgroup of women, involved major changes in their self-expectations and ability to access support. The findings identify areas that nurses should consider in health promotion activities with women who are experiencing these life transitions.
The effectiveness of weekly iron-folic acid supplements promoted through a government-industry partnership was assessed in pregnant and non-pregnant women in the Philippines. Compliance to both weekly and daily supplementation increased during the year-long study period, but was highest with weekly supplementation. Serum ferritin and hematocrit increased significantly, whereas the hemoglobin level showed minimal change, probably because of lack of other heme-forming nutrients such as vitamin A. Serum ferritin increments were significantly higher in women taking the iron-folic acid supplements for more than 6 weeks. Weekly iron-folic acid supplementation should be recommended as a preventive strategy to control iron deficiency among reproductive-age women in the Philippines.
With the participation of the government and private sectors in the Philippines, weekly iron-folic acid supplementation introduced within a social marketing framework and a social mobilization campaign successfully improved knowledge and practice of buying and regularly taking supplements by women of reproductive age, both pregnant and non-pregnant. Adolescent girls in school were also active participants.
The clinical diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is unreliable. Studies have been performed examining the utility of frequent duplex scans. However, these studies included patients outside of the intensive care unit. The incidence of venous thromboembolism and the effect of a less intense surveillance protocol was prospectively examined at a level-1 urban trauma center for a 6 month period. During the study period there were 726 admission to the surgical intensive care unit. Sequential compression devices (SCDs) were used for DVT prophylaxis in 93 per cent of the admissions. A total of 114 duplex scans were ordered: 42 per cent for surveillance and the rest for evaluation of a clinical indication. Twelve DVTs were discovered (11% overall DVT rate). No patient on subcutaneous heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin developed a DVT or pulmonary embolism (PE). Four patients suffered a PE; however, none were found to have a lower extremity DVT on duplex ultrasound and all received SCD prophylaxis. Overall, proper use of DVT prophylaxis for intensive care unit days 1-14 was 77 per cent. The incidence of venous thromboembolism in a group of patients at overall high risk was low. A program of DVT surveillance with duplex ultrasound was not cost-effective.
Trauma patients are at risk for deep venous thrombosis (DVT) but often cannot receive systemic anticoagulation therapy. The major reason for failure of mechanical methods of DVT prophylaxis is ineffective usage. It has been postulated that foot pumps may have a better compliance rate than do other devices. One thousand observations were performed on trauma patients in both the intensive care unit (ICU) and on the surgical ward. Foot pumps were applied properly and functioning correctly 59% of the time. Patients in the ICU had significantly better compliance than did patients on the surgical ward. These rates are not better than published rates for other devices for DVT prophylaxis.
We conducted a prospective survey of the utilization of venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis in 152 Medical ICU (MICU) patients. Utilization of prophylaxis was recorded daily, and commonly accepted risk factors for VTE were noted. Only 32.9 percent of patients received prophylaxis, and there was a delay of 2.0 +/- 2.8 days prior to institution. Eighty-seven percent of patients had one VTE risk factor and 52 percent had multiple factors. We conclude that utilization of prophylaxis is low in MICU patients even though they are at high risk for VTE.
BACKGROUND: Computed tomography pulmonary -angiography (CTPA) plays an increasingly important role in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE). Although accurate in the detection of large PE, its accuracy in other patient groups is yet to be defined. AIM: To compare CTPA with pulmonary angiography as a second-line investigation in patients with a ventilation/perfusion (VQ) scan indicating an intermediate probability of PE. METHODS: We recruited 25 patients over a 17-month period. Subjects were eligible if they: (i). had clinically suspected PE, (ii). had a VQ scan indicating an intermediate probability of PE and (iii). were referred for pulmonary angiography. Subjects underwent CTPA within 36 h of the VQ scan. CTPA was interpreted without knowledge of the results of the pulmonary angiogram by two of the authors. RESULTS: PE was prevalent (i.e. embolus detected at pulmonary angiography) in seven of 25 subjects (28%). The sensitivity of CTPA was 57% and the specificity was 94%. CONCLUSIONS: In the setting of intermediate-probability VQ scanning, CTPA may be used to clarify the diagnosis of PE. However, a negative CTPA cannot -definitely exclude PE. Conventional pulmonary angiography may be necessary to determine the presence of PE if CTPA is negative.
PURPOSE: To compare the accuracy of spiral computed tomography (CT) with that of ventilation-perfusion (V-P) scintigraphy in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-four patients in whom indeterminate V-P scans or discordant clinical and scintigraphic results were obtained underwent both V-P scanning and contrast material-enhanced spiral CT. The reference standard was pulmonary angiographic results in 26 patients (group I) or clinical outcome in 28 (group II). RESULTS: Six (25%) of 24 group I patients had proved PE. The prospective sensitivity and specificity for segmental or subsegmental PE were 67% and 100%, respectively, and the positive and negative predictive values were 100% and 90%, respectively. In two group II patients, V-P scans had high probability for acute embolism, but spiral CT scans showed only chronic PE; in one patients, the V-P scan had low probability and the CT scan was positive for acute PE. An alternative CT diagnosis was established in four (31%) of 13 patients in whom a normal or low-probability V-P scan was obtained. Clinical outcome was consistent with spiral CT results in all cases. CONCLUSION: Spiral CT has greater accuracy and specificity than V-P scanning in patients with an unresolved diagnosis and may be useful as the primary screening technique for PE.
The purpose of this study is to compare sensitivity and specificity of helical CT and MR imaging for detecting acute pulmonary embolism(PE). Patients who were suspected clinically of having PE were randomly assigned to undergo either helical contrast-enhanced CT or gradient-echo MR (if one modality was contraindicated, the patient was assigned to the other.) Patients were considered to have PE if they had: 1) high-probability V-Q scan and low clinical probability of PE; 2) pulmonary angiogram positive for PE. Patients were considered not to have PE if they had either:1)normal V-Q scan; 2) low probability V-Q scan and low clinical probability of PE; or 3) pulmonary angiogram negative for PE. The CT and MR images were read randomly and independently by five radiologists with varying levels of CT and MR experience. Twenty eight patients underwent CT and 25 MR. A total of 21 patients underwent pulmonary angiography (6 had PE, 15 did not have PE). Of the other 32 patients, 15 had high probability scan/high clinical probability and 17 had low probability scan/low clinical probability. For the five observers, the average sensitivity of CT was 75% and of MR 46%; the average specificity of CT was 89% and of MR 90%. Experience with vascular MR and enhanced CT influenced diagnostic accuracy. For the two vascular MR experts, average sensitivity and specificity of MR were 71% and 97%, and of CT 73% and 97%. In this pilot study, when CT and MR were interpreted with comparable expertise, they had similar accuracy for detecting pulmonary embolism.
Forty-two patients were prospectively evaluated with spiral volumetric computed tomography (CT) and selective pulmonary angiography of each lung to detect central pulmonary thromboembolism. Spiral volumetric CT images obtained with either 90 mL of 30% contrast material or 120 mL of 12% contrast material were graded as excellent or good in 98% of the examinations (41 patients). Diagnosis of pulmonary embolism with spiral volumetric CT was based on the direct visualization of intraluminal clots: partial filling defects (n = 41; 37%), complete filling defects (n = 51; 46%), "railway track" signs (n = 6; 5%), and mural defects (n = 14; 12%). All 23 patients with normal findings of spiral volumetric CT had normal findings of pulmonary angiography. With spiral volumetric CT, the finding of 112 central emboli (eight main, 28 lobar, and 76 segmental) corresponded exactly to the angiographic findings, but nine intersegmental lymph nodes were erroneously interpreted as filling defects. In one case of normal pulmonary angiographic findings, asymmetry in pulmonary arterial perfusion was misinterpreted as pulmonary embolism with spiral volumetric CT. Spiral volumetric CT can reliably depict thromboemboli in second- to fourth-division pulmonary vessels.
BACKGROUND: Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) has been associated with antiphospholipid antibodies (APA) including anticardiolipin and lupus anticoagulant. Therapy using heparin and aspirin has been shown to significantly improve the live birth rate. We evaluated whether other APA should be considered as a basis for treatment in women with RPL. We also assessed the efficacy of heparin and aspirin therapy compared with aspirin alone in these women. METHODS: A two-centred, prospective, cohort evaluation of 79 women with two or more consecutive pregnancy losses who underwent a complete evaluation for RPL that was negative except for positive APA. Women with RPL and APA to cardiolipin (CL), phosphatidyl serine (PS) and/or lupus anticoagulant (LAC) treated with heparin and aspirin (group 1) were compared with those with other positive APA (to phosphatidyl inositol, phosphatidyl glycerol and/or phosphatidyl ethanolamine) treated with heparin or aspirin (group 2) or treated with aspirin alone (group 3). RESULTS: There were no significant differences in patients' demographics between groups. There were 19 viable infants born to 25 women (76%) in group 1, 18 viable infants born to the 28 women (64%) in group 2, and 12 viable infants born to the 26 women (46%) in group 3. Only the comparison between group 1 and group 3 reached statistical significance (P = 0.03). CONCLUSION: APA other than CL, PS and LAC may be associated with RPL.
Fifty-seven pregnancies in women with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) are presented. These were treated with s.c. enoxaparin and low dose aspirin. In fourteen pregnancies warfarin was prescribed between weeks 15-34 (warfarin group). The decision to switch to warfarin depended on a morbidity score, and the patient's consent. Neither teratogenicity nor significant maternal, fetal or neonatal hemorrhage was observed. Despite the higher pretreatment morbidity score of the warfarin group, the live birth rate was high in both groups: 86% in the warfarin group and 87% in the non-warfarin group. There was no significant difference in week of delivery, birth weight, or incidence of thrombosis between the groups. The study demonstrates the efficacy and safety of anticoagulants during pregnancy. The use of LMWH in pregnant women with APS not being moot, warfarin might be justified in selected patients.
This study was conducted to determine if lower dose heparin (LD Heparin) combined with aspirin is as efficacious as higher dose heparin (HD Heparin) for the treatment of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome in women seeking pregnancy. The method of the study was a prospective, single center trial including 50 patients who were consecutively assigned to treatment. Each patient had at least three consecutive, spontaneous pregnancy losses, positive antiphospholipid antibodies on two occasions, and a complete evaluation. Data were compared using Fisher's exact test. Viable infants were delivered from 20/25 (80%) women treated with higher dose heparin vs. 19/25 (76%) of women treated with lower dose heparin. There were no significant differences between groups with respect to gestational age at the time of delivery (37.2 +/- 3.4 versus 37.7 +/- 1.6 weeks), maternal complications, or fetal complications. A lower dose of heparin plus aspirin was as effective as higher dose heparin for the treatment of antiphospholipid antibody-associated recurrent pregnancy loss.
Clinical pathway is a useful strategy for the management of risk and cost for medical care. We developed an electronic clinical pathway (e-CP) for community acquired pneumonia (CAP). We programmed all medical procedures, including physical and laboratory examinations, medical care, prescriptions, diets, limitations of activities, and patient education on a computer. With e-CP, we achieved 30% cost reduction (34048 points vs. 24338 points), 25% shortening of admission duration (10.77 days vs. 8.03 days) and 21% shortening of the duration of intravenous antibiotics administration (8.22 days vs. 6.47 days). Introduction of computer-aided clinical pathway for CAP may contribute to the standardization of medical care for patients with CAP.
A multifaceted approach that involves early debridement and control of infection is critical to successful and rapid burn wound healing. This pilot study was conducted in 15 adult patients with burns to assess the usefulness of early enzymatic debridement with a combination of collagenase ointment and polymyxin B sulfate/bacitracin spray versus silver sulfadiazine cream in partial-thickness burns. Combination treatment with collagenase and polymyxin B sulfate/bacitracin resulted in significantly shorter time to achieve a clean wound bed than silver sulfadiazine (median 6 vs 12 days; p = 0.0012) and significantly more rapid wound healing than silver sulfadiazine (median 10 vs 15 days; p = 0.0007). These results are encouraging and justify implementation of a larger, multicenter, comparative study.
Wound care is painful for the patient with a burn injury and tedious for the burn unit staff but necessary to remove exudates and debris and to limit infections. In an effort to circumvent daily dressing changes while ensuring optimal wound protection, Sildimac (Marion Laboratories, Kansas City, Mo.), a new drug delivery system for silver sulfadiazine, was developed. When silver sulfadiazine, a topical antimicrobial commonly used for the treatment of burns, is incorporated into the delivery system, the drug is released in a sustained fashion. We report here the results of a multicenter evaluation of the safety and efficiency of Sildimac for treatment of full-thickness burn wounds. Sildimac, when left in place for up to 4 days, appears to be as effective as twice-daily wound cleansing and application of Silvadene cream 1% (Marion Laboratories, Kansas City, Mo.) for the treatment of full-thickness burns.
In 1986, 50 patients with stages II and III carcinoma of the cervix were entered into this prospective randomized study. Twenty-five cases (Group I) were treated only by radical radiation whereas remaining 25 cases (Group II) received local hyperthermia in addition to radical radiation. Hyperthermia was delivered by intracavitary brachyhyperthermia approach using an endotract applicator. Both the groups were followed up for a minimum period of 18 months. Group II patients achieved better local control (14 out of 20 evaluable cases) than the Group I patients (11 out of 22 evaluable cases). A disturbing observation was the increased incidence of distant metastasis in Group II (4 out of 23 cases) as compared to Group I (1 out of 23 cases), though most of them remained disease free locally. The increasing use of hyperthermia in the management of various cancers needs to be reviewed in this context.
The present study aimed to compare the effects of two currently used selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in Japan taking the individual background in 5-HTT gene-linked polymorphic region (5HTTLPR) genotype into account. Clinical responses to paroxetine and fluvoxamine were evaluated by total and cluster depressive symptoms for 81 Japanese patients who were diagnosed with major depression. Patients with the l allele had a greater percentage reduction on the total score (P=0.059) and somatic anxiety items (P=0.026) of the 21-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) score compared to s/s genotype carriers. Paroxetine was significantly more effective than fluvoxamine in the s/s carriers, as evaluated on the percentage reduction in total score (P=0.012) and core (P=0.049) HAM-D after 4 weeks of medication, but not in the l/s carriers. These findings suggest that the genetic test may be useful in investigating the efficacy of the two SSRIs, and that normalization by the 5HTTLPR genotypes may lead to improvement of the precision of comparative analysis.
The aim of the study was to compare the efficacy and tolerance of fluvoxamine (FL) and amitriptyline (AM) in the treatment of patients hospitalized for moderate and severe depression and to evaluate the spectrum of antidepressive activity in FL. The study was open, randomized and comparative. Sixty patients (mean age 41 +/- 2.9 years) diagnosed as having recurrent depressive disorder, a moderate or severe depressive episode (ICD-10 F33.1, F33.2) were divided into two equal groups treated with FL or AM. The efficacies of FL and AM were comparable, with AM exhibiting an earlier clinical effect and FL having a better tolerance. FL was defined as an antidepressant with the predominantly sedative effect comparable to that of AM, but being better tolerated.
Changes in depressed outpatients' experience of daily activities after 6 weeks of antidepressant treatment were assessed with the experience sampling method (ESM). On the sickness impact profile, treatment responders (HAM-D < or = 7, n = 12) improved more than nonresponders (n = 9) in the domains of household chores, leisure and social activities. On ESM measures completed 10 x each day for 6 days pre- and posttreatment, responders showed greater increases in time spent in chores and greater decreases in passive leisure time than nonresponders. Responders showed greater increases in positive affect and greater decreases in negative affect during all activities. Thus, ESM provides quantitative evidence of changes in real life time use and subjective experience accompanying clinical improvement.
A total of 32 unmedicated patients with episodes of major depression (DSM-III-R) and 32 normal control subjects matched for age and sex were tested for heart rate variability (R-R variation) while resting and during deep breathing. Compared with the group of healthy subjects, the depressed patients showed no abnormalities before therapy. The patients were randomly allocated for treatment with 150 mg of amitriptyline per day (N = 8), 150 mg of doxepin per day (N = 8), 150 mg of fluvoxamine per day (N = 8), and 20 mg of paroxetine per day (N = 8). During treatment with either amitriptyline or doxepin, the coefficients of variation at rest and during deep breathing, which are largely independent of heart rate, had significantly decreased after 14 days (p = 0.012), whereas patients treated with fluvoxamine or paroxetine showed no significant changes of heart rate variability parameters after 14 days. The implications of these findings are discussed.
1. Intent-to-treat analysis of a parallel, double-blind comparative study of fluvoxamine, imipramine and placebo in patients with major depressive episode (DSM III). 2. A posteriori the patients have been stratified in three severity groups on basis of their initial HAMD-score: Mild depression (15-20), Moderate depression (21-25) and Severe depression (> or = 26). 3. At endpoint both the decrease in HAMD-scores and the percentage responders (CGI 1-2) differed significantly comparing fluvoxamine with placebo and tended to differ significantly comparing with imipramine in the severely depressed patients. 4. The results with fluvoxamine in severely depressed patients were better than in moderately depressed patients, which in turn were better than in mildly depressed patients. 5. Despite a lower daily fluvoxamine dosage in the mild group, the premature terminator rate in this group (47%) was higher than in the moderate group (27%) or in the severe group (24%). With placebo the situation was opposite. More patients (47%) terminated before day 28 in the severe group, compared to the moderate (32%) and the mild group (24%), while on placebo. 6. The majority of responders to fluvoxamine at endpoint, showed already improvement at week 1 (82.5%).
BACKGROUND: The data presented represent cardiovascular parameters collected from one site of a larger, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 6-week outpatient efficacy study of the serotonin uptake inhibitor fluvoxamine in depressed outpatients. METHOD: In this smaller study, we compared fluvoxamine (N = 17) to the prototypic antidepressant, imipramine (N = 14), and to placebo (N = 15). Specific parameters investigated were drug effects on postural pulse and blood pressure changes and ECG parameters including PR, QRS, and QTc intervals and ventricular heart rate. RESULTS: Fluvoxamine had few effects on measured parameters. Imipramine produced statistically significant changes on all measures; placebo had no effects on cardiac measures. CONCLUSION: Our data support that fluvoxamine, in a sample of healthy depressed outpatients, has little effect on cardiovascular function. Further study and clinical experience with this drug will be necessary before the full extent of its cardiac profile is known.
A series of double-blind hospital based studies comparing fluvoxamine with other antidepressants in depressed patients is reviewed. Overall there were no significant differences in terms of efficacy between fluvoxamine and the comparators (amitriptyline, dothiepin, lofepramine and mianserin). Fluvoxamine was shown to be associated with a low incidence of anticholinergic, cardiovascular or sedative effects. This profile of activity, together with low toxicity in overdosage, has established the place of fluvoxamine in the treatment of depressive illness.
Although there is a body of literature on the therapeutic efficacy of sleep deprivation (SD) there are only a few investigations in which the relevance of antidepressive medication for the clinical efficacy of SD has been studied. Based on the literature and on our own investigations with major depressed patients it seems that for the day-1 response it does not matter if and what type of antidepressive medication the patient receives. Furthermore, the results of our double blind study reveal that the day-1 response to total sleep deprivation (TSD) is not associated with a clear relationship to the outcome after 4 weeks treatment with either fluvoxamine or maprotiline. On the other hand, our data indicate that the day-2 response to TSD is significantly correlated with a beneficial outcome after subchronic treatment with maprotiline.
Electroencephalogram sleep measures over a 4-week period were obtained on 35 inpatients with major depression (unipolar) who received either fluvoxamine or desipramine in a randomized double-blind trial. Fluvoxamine showed immediate rapid eye movement (REM) sleep suppression and an alerting effect on sleep continuity measures. In contrast, desipramine administration was associated with REM suppression and sleep continuity improvement. The "alerting" quality of fluvoxamine, similar to other serotonergic antidepressants, appears to be unrelated to a lack of clinical efficacy, but may be related to persistent REM sleep suppression. However, it is premature to comment on the serotonin specificity for REM sleep.
Fluvoxamine was given in placebo-controlled trials to 33 severely depressed patients of between 60 and 71 years, 29 received imipramine and 14 placebo. At week 4 of treatment fluvoxamine and imipramine were superior to placebo on the HAMD and CGI scales (P less than 0.05). There was indication of an earlier onset of antidepressant activity in the fluvoxamine group. There was no evidence of systematic changes in laboratory variables in any treatment group. Fluvoxamine and placebo had similar effects on heart rate and blood pressure. Imipramine was associated with significant postural falls in mean systolic pressure. The most frequent unwanted symptom with fluvoxamine was mild nausea, with imipramine, dry mouth. Toxic confusion was the major reason for dropout in the imipramine (n = 4) and nausea (n = 3) in the fluvoxamine-treated group.
Of nine nonsuppressors on the dexamethasone suppression test (DST), five (56%) developed intolerable side effects during treatment with fluvoxamine, a new serotonin uptake inhibiting antidepressant, compared with three of 24 suppressors (13%).
1 A double-blind placebo-controlled study of fluvoxamine and imipramine was performed in a group of depressed patients. Twenty-two patients received fluvoxamine (mean dose 101 mg/day), 25 received imipramine (mean dose 127 mg/day) and 22 received placebo. 2 Apart from an increase in the SGOT and SGPT values of four imipramine patients, no statistically significant changes in haematology or urinalysis were judged to be medically relevant. Fluvoxamine exhibited fewer anticholinergic side effects than imipramine. 3 Both fluvoxamine treated patients and imipramine-treated patients exhibited a statistically significant improvement at the end of the 28-day treatment period with respect to the placebo patients, as measured using the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, and the Clinical Global Impression Scale. Evaluations of the results of the Beck Depression Inventory and the Profile of Mood States revealed a statistically significant improvement for imipramine patients with respect to placebo at week 4, but not for fluvoxamine patients. It is postulated on the basis of quantitative pharmaco-EEG findings, that the slight superiority of imipramine over fluvoxamine was due to underdosing of the latter.
1. Fluvoxamine is a potent serotonin re-uptake inhibitor, with little or no noradrenergic or anticholinergic activity. 2. The results of three studies using an almost identical protocol with a prospectively randomized, double-blind design comparing fluvoxamine and chlorimipramine are presented. 3. In a population of 98 subjects suffering from a variety of depressive conditions, there was a marked improvement over four weeks in both groups. dosage was maintained between 150 and 300 mg per day. 4. There were no changes of clinical importance in vital signs, hematology or biochemistry, but pulse rates increased in the chlorimipramine group. 5. There were fewer concurrent signs and symptoms in the fluvoxamine group, especially those attributable to anticholinergic activity.
The effects of a combined token economy and reserved parking program were evaluated as a means of increasing car pooling among students on a university campus. Following a baseline period, students in two experimental parking lots were notified of the availability of reserved parking and coupons redeemable for 25 cents in merchandise for each occupant of automobiles containing two or more people. Two control lots also were monitored for a comparison of treatment effects. Results indicated variable increases in car pooling in the two experimental lots and no increase in the control lots. Removal of the 25-cent coupons from one treatment lot (reserved parking only) did not adversely affect rates of car pooling. An analysis of individual automobile occupancy rates among car poolers indicated distinct patterns of car pooling and underscored the importance of individual subject data analysis in the present situation. A cost-benefit analysis indicated that even moderately effective car pool programs can be cost-effective on both a public and personal level.
We describe the design of the Managing Anti-coagulation Services Trial (MAST), a practice-improvement trial testing whether anticoagulation services are a preferred method of managing anticoagulation for stroke prevention among patients with atrial fibrillation. Most randomized trials within the health care environment are designed as efficacy studies to determine what works under ideal conditions or ideal clinical practice. In contrast, effectiveness trials seek to generalize the results of efficacy studies by determining what works under more typical practice conditions. Practice-improvement trials are effectiveness trials that examine the management of a clinical problem in the context in which care is usually given. Noteworthy features of the MAST include defining the intervention in functional terms and collaboration with managed care organizations.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Acute rejection is still a major problem after liver transplantation. Ursodeoxycholic acid has beneficial effects in cholestasis by reducing the expression of major histocompatibility complex antigens. METHODS: We have performed a double-blind randomised study comparing ursodeoxycholic acid with placebo for the prevention of acute cellular rejection after liver transplantation. Twenty-six patients received ursodeoxycholic acid 600 mg per day and 24 patients received placebo for 2 months. RESULTS: Neither rejection incidence nor rejection severity was significantly different in the two groups (p > 0.90). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that adjuvant ursodeoxycholic acid administration does not prevent rejection after liver transplantation.
A randomized prospective trial was undertaken to compare intraarterial administration of recombinant human tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) with urokinase (UK) in 32 patients with peripheral arterial or bypass graft occlusions. Sixteen patients were randomized to receive rt-PA and 16 to receive UK. The rt-PA dose was administered as a 10-mg bolus into the thrombus, followed by 5 mg/h for up to 24 hours. The UK dose was administered as a 60,000 IU bolus into the thrombus, followed by 240,000 IU/h for 2 hours, 120,000 IU/h for 2 hours, and 60,000 IU/h for up to 20 hours. Serial arteriograms were obtained at baseline and at 4, 8 or 16, and 24 hours. The endpoint was defined as 95% of greater clot lysis. The cumulative numbers of patients with successful thrombolysis (rt-PA vs UK) were four vs none at 4 hours, seven vs one at 8 hours, seven vs three at 16 hours, and eight vs six at 24 hours. Lysis occurred more rapidly in the rt-PA group (P = .04). Major bleeding complications occurred in five rt-PA patients and two UK patients (P = .39). At 24 hours, fibrinogen levels were significantly lower in the rt-PA group than in the UK group (P = .01). There was no apparent difference in 30-day clinical success.
The aim of this double-blind, comparative study was to assess the efficacy and safety of gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) in ameliorating the symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Newly admitted alcohol-dependent patients (n = 98) were randomized to receive either clomethiazole 1000 mg daily (CLO group) (n = 33), or 50 mg GHB/kg body wt (n = 33) or 100 mg GHB/kg body wt (n = 32). This dose was administered for 5 days, halved on day 6, and on days 7 and 8 only placebo was given. As CLO is available as capsules and GHB as syrup, a double-dummy method was used to try to ensure blindness. The groups were matched in terms of baseline demographic and alcohol-related variables. There was no difference between the three treatments in ratings of alcohol withdrawal symptoms nor requests for additional medication. After tapering off the active medication, there was no increase in withdrawal symptoms, indicating that physical tolerance did not develop to either GHB or CLO within the 5-day treatment period. The most frequently reported side-effect of GHB was transient vertigo, particularly after the evening double dose.
We report on the effectiveness and safety of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid in the therapy of overt alcohol withdrawal syndromes, their prevention, and the prevention of relapses in formerly detoxified alcoholics. We studied 321 patients (236 men, 85 women), divided into two open-study groups for the treatment and prevention of alcohol withdrawal syndromes and one double-blind study group to evaluate the effects of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid versus placebo on alcoholic craving and relapses in detoxified patients. Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid treatment promptly reduced withdrawal symptoms in all patients and prevented alcohol withdrawal syndromes in 55% of cases. The attenuation of craving in detoxified patients was significantly greater in the gamma-hydroxybutyric acid-treated group in comparison with the placebo-treated group. The therapeutic use of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid was not accompanied by serious side effects. Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid diversion was poorly represented: gamma-hydroxybutyric acid-induced abuse was reported in 4 (1.1%) of 345 treated patients, and only 9 cases of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid acute poisoning were reported in the years 1992-1995. Our results suggest that gamma-hydroxybutyric acid, with a favorable risk/benefit ratio, is a clinically useful drug in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
The effect of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) on ethanol withdrawal syndrome in alcoholics was investigated in a randomised double-blind study. Patients with withdrawal symptoms were treated either with GHB (orally in a syrup preparation) (11 patients) or with the syrup alone (12). GHB treatment (50 mg/kg) led to a prompt reduction in withdrawal symptoms, such as tremors, sweating, nausea, depression, anxiety, and restlessness. The only side-effect was dizziness. GHB may be useful in the management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome in man.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial performed at 5 residential units of the Finnish Defence Forces was conducted to assess the antiviral activity, efficacy and safety of inhaled zanamivir for the treatment of naturally acquired influenza. Conscripts were recruited within 2 d of onset of typical influenza symptoms and received inhaled zanamivir 10 mg via a Diskhaler twice daily for 5 d or matching placebo. Time to alleviation of clinically significant symptoms of influenza was the primary endpoint. Viral load measurements were made using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction assays. 435/588 patients (74%) had laboratory-confirmed influenza infection. The mean area under the curve for viral load during the first 48 h of treatment was 8.48 [95% confidence interval (95% CI) 2.85 to 14.11] log10 vRNA copies/ml x h lower in the zanamivir group compared with placebo (p = 0.003). Zanamivir reduced the time to alleviation of symptoms versus placebo in the influenza-positive group (medians 2.0 vs 2.33 d; 95% CI-0.17 to 1.0 d, p = 0.08). Zanamivir rapidly reduced viral load following the start of therapy compared with placebo and was well tolerated.
The study was carried out to evaluate the therapeutic effects of zanamivir, a highly selective, potent and specific inhibitor of influenza A and B virus neuraminidases, in adult patients with acute influenza-like illness. Patients who presented within 36 h of the onset of influenza-like symptoms were randomly assigned to receive one of three treatments, twice daily, for 5 days: 10 mg zanamivir powder for inhalation (zanamivir inhalation group), 10 mg zanamivir powder for inhalation plus 6.4 mg zanamivir nasal spray (zanamivir inhalation plus intranasal group) or placebo (placebo group). The primary end point was the time to alleviation of the three major symptoms (fever, headache and myalgia). The secondary end point was the time to alleviation of five influenza symptoms (fever, headache, myalgia, cough and sore throat). One hundred and sixteen patients with influenza-like illness were recruited to the study. No differences were observed between the two groups of patients who received zanamivir (inhalation group or inhalation plus intranasal group). Patients who received zanamivir recovered significantly faster (median 3 days to recovery) than the patients in the placebo group (median 4 days to recovery; P < 0.01). Topically administered zanamivir was well tolerated. This study confirms that in adults, topically administered zanamivir is well tolerated and is effective in reducing the time to alleviation of influenza symptoms.
The effectiveness of prophylactic cefoxitin in preventing postcesarean section infection was studied in a high risk population. One hundred women were evaluated, and on a random double-blind basis 50 received placebo and 50 received cefoxitin. There were three doses of drug given intravenously, either placebo or 1 gram of cefoxitin at the time of cord clamping and again four and eight hours later. Those receiving cefoxitin had significantly less postoperative infections, fewer had bacteremia and there was less postoperative fever as measured by the fever index. The patient with the most protracted infection in this study received cefoxitin. Problems with the use of systemic antibiotic prophylaxis in preventing postcesarean section infection are discussed. Cefoxitin is an effective agent to use in patients undergoing cesarean section who are at high risk for infection.
Prophylactic cefazolin was evaluated in high-risk obstetric patients who had invasive fetal monitoring and subsequent cesarean section. A three-dose regimen of either cefazolin or placebo was administered randomly in a double-blind manner to 93 patients, 48 receiving cefazolin and 45 placebo, with the first dose given when the cord was clamped. In the placebo group, 51% of the patients were treated for endomyometritis compared to 29% in the cefazolin group. The incidence of urinary tract and wound infections was similar in the 2 groups. One patient in the active drug group was diagnosed as having septic pelvic thrombophlebitis and received multiple antibiotics and heparin before she recovered. One patient in the placebo group required triple antibiotic therapy. Operation to control infection was not required in any patients and there were no maternal deaths. The cefazolin patients had fewer degree-hours of morbidity as calculated by the quantitative fever index (P less than 0.002). The perioperative use of cefazolin was efficacious in reducing the incidence of endomyometritis, but did not prevent serious postoperative pelvic infection.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether including a placebo arm in a clinical trial of hormone replacement therapy influenced women's stated willingness to participate. DESIGN: Quasirandomised, interview based study. Setting: 10 group practices in the Medical Research Council's General Practice Research Framework. PARTICIPANTS: 436 postmenopausal women aged 45-64 who had not had a hysterectomy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Stated willingness to enter a trial and reasons for the decisions made. RESULTS: Of 218 women told about the trial without a placebo arm, 85 (39%) indicated their willingness to enter compared with 65 (30%) of the 218 women told about the trial with the placebo arm (P=0.06). Part of this difference was due to explicit reluctance to take a placebo. Altruism and personal benefit were the reasons most frequently given for wanting to take part in a trial. The reasons most frequently cited for not wanting to take part were reluctance to restart periods, not wanting to take unknown or unnecessary tablets, or not wanting to interfere with present good health. CONCLUSION: For preventive trials the inclusion of a placebo arm may reduce patients' willingness to participate.
We evaluate the impact of a videotape specially produced to supplement written information about preventive HIV vaccine trials. One hundred eighty-six injection drug users were randomly assigned to an education session in which either: (a) a pamphlet was reviewed before a brief discussion period or (b) the videotape was watched prior to reviewing the pamphlet and participating in the discussion. The relationship among retention of information, trust in government, and willingness to participate in a vaccine trial was tested before the presentation of information, immediately after, and 1 month later. Results indicate that both methods produced significant increases in knowledge immediately after information presentation, but only the video-supplemented group retained the information 1 month later. Subjects receiving the video supplement also showed a significant increase in trust at the first posttest period, but this increase was not maintained 1 month later. Regardless of group assignment or evaluation point, willingness to participate was not associated with knowledge but was associated with trust in government.
The study objective was to assess the relative effects of 2 approaches to teaching about a clinical trial, in terms of patients' satisfaction, information understanding, and whether or not they would enter such a trial. One hundred patients receiving radiation therapy for a variety of cancer diagnoses were randomized to receive information about a hypothetical trial, either by audio tape or interactive computer program. A day later, information understanding was assessed. One week later, method satisfaction and whether respondents would enter such a trial were assessed. There were no differences in understanding or satisfaction. Members of the computer program group tended to report a more positive attitude towards trial entry (chi 2 = 4.0; 1 df; P = 0.05). Overall, refusers tended to be women with higher understanding scores. The results suggest that teaching with interactive components might not adversely affect trial accrual. Further work involving an actual trial entry decision is merited; the sex of the respondent should be controlled in designing this future work.
The study purpose was to determine whether the framing of treatment information influenced patients' reported preferences for participating in treatment decision making and for trial entry. Ninety cancer patients read either neutrally-, positively-, or negatively-framed information about a chemotherapeutic treatment, then indicated their preferences for participating in the treatment decision, and whether they would participate in a clinical trial incorporating this protocol. There was no difference across information groups in preferences for participating in treatment decision making or willingness to enter such a clinical trial. Preference for participation in treatment decision making was significantly related to age (t = 2.54; p = 0.022), sex (x2 = 3.89; p = 0.05), and education (t = 2.54; p = 0.018); trial entry preferences were unrelated to these demographic variables. These results imply that, in this clinical context, attitudes towards participation in treatment decision making may be associated with characteristics of the patient, and attitudes towards trial entry may be dependent upon the clinical characteristics of a particular trial, but neither set of attitudes is influenced by the framing of protocol information.
Informed consent has been indirectly studied only in settings that do not replicate the actual consent process. We designed a sham study and randomly allocated adult ambulatory patients to receive one of two consent forms: Consent A (n = 52) described a randomized trial of usual treatment vs a new medication that "may work twice as fast as the usual treatment"; or Consent B (n = 48) that described a randomized trial of a new medication that "may work half as fast as the usual treatment". Patients randomized to Consent A were more likely to consent than those randomized to Consent B (consent rate A = 67%, consent rate B = 42%, p less than 0.01). Among patients who cited quantitative information, the difference in consent rate was even more marked (95% vs 36%, p less than 0.001); patients who did not cite quantitative information had equivalent consent rates. Patients who perceived minimal or severe symptoms had lower consent rates than those with mid-range symptom scores (chi 2(2) = 8.35, p = 0.015). Patients who recognize quantitative information will use it to make informed consent decisions.
We conducted a case-control study to determine the sources of fluoride which are particular risk factors to dental fluorosis. Cases and non-cases were identified by the screening of 8-, 9-, and 10-year-old schoolchildren in the fluoridated community of East York, Ontario. Parents were interviewed about the child's first five years of residence and about diet and preventive caries practices. The Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio and associated chi-square tests were used to assess the association of fluorosis with several potential sources, controlling for other sources of fluoride and mother's education. The prevalence of mild fluorosis [1-4 on the Thylstrup and Fejerskov (1978) Index] was 13%. Those who brushed their teeth before the age of 25 months had 11 times the odds of fluorosis compared with those beginning toothbrushing later; prolonged use of infant formula (greater than or equal to 13 months) was associated with 3.5 times the risk of fluorosis, compared with no, or shorter duration of, formula use. We estimate that these factors were responsible for 72% and 22%, respectively, of the cases in our population. Dental fluorosis is not a public health problem in East York, but parents should be advised to supervise toothbrushing by children under 2 years of age.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the cost effectiveness of a postal toothpaste programme to prevent caries in 5-year-old children in the north west of England. PARTICIPANTS: Birth cohorts of children aged 12 months were recruited from high caries risk populations in nine health districts. DESIGN: The results of a randomised controlled trial to measure the effects of a postal toothpaste programme are used and related to the costs of running a similar programme. Children in the trial received free toothpaste on four occasions a year and a toothbrush once a year for four years from age 12 months to 5 years. When aged 5-6 years children were examined by trained, calibrated examiners using BASCD standards. Those who received toothpaste containing 1450 ppm F were found to have a significantly lower mean dmft than those who had not. The costs that would be incurred by a public dental service running such a postal toothpaste programme are identified, measured and related to the likely health improvement that could be achieved. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The cost per tooth saved and the cost per child saved from caries experience and extraction experience. RESULTS: The estimated cost per tooth saved from carious attack was pounds sterling 80.83 and the cost per child of preventing caries experience was pounds sterling 424.38 and avoiding any extractions was pounds sterling 679.01. Analysis resulted in an overestimation of costs and underestimation of benefits. CONCLUSION: The programme achieved a significant caries reduction in children who received the 1450 ppm F toothpaste and the costs are now available to those considering provision of treatment services in areas where children are at high caries risk.
The purpose of the study was to compare the anticaries effects of two dentifrices containing sodium fluoride with fluoride concentrations of 250 ppm and 1450 ppm on the primary dentition of kindergarten children. A total of 319 children participated in the study (155 in the low-fluoride and 164 in the high-fluoride group) and brushed their teeth daily under supervision in their kindergartens. The children were examined by one dentist trained according to the procedures of O'Mullane et al., and carious lesions were recorded at the cavitation level according to the WHO criteria. At the final examination after 22 months, the groups comprised 83 (low-fluoride group) and 89 (high-fluoride group) children. The differences in mean dmfs and dmft increments between the two groups were not statistically significant. In both groups about 57% of the children remained caries free. Excluding these children from the analyses, the mean dmfs increment was significantly lower in the high-fluoride group, but not the mean dmft increment. The mean dmfs increment excluding occlusal surfaces was significantly lower in the high-fluoride group.
A recent clinical trial investigated the cariostatic effectiveness of a low (550 ppm) fluoride toothpaste in comparison with a standard (1050 ppm) control paste in pre-school children who were 2-years-old at the start of the 3-year trial. The present study has investigated the prevalence of enamel opacities in permanent incisor teeth and of caries in children who had taken part. As well as children from test and control groups, a third group of non-trial children were included in the sample. A total of 1,523 children were examined in schools and had photographs taken of their upper permanent incisor teeth. The latter were scored using the Thylstrup and Fejerskov (TF) index for fluorosis and the modified Developmental Defects of Enamel (DDE) index. Differences between the groups were small in real terms but using the TF index the child and tooth prevalence of opacities were significantly lower in the children who had used the test paste with a lower fluoride content; the same trend was seen in diffuse defects scored using the modified DDE index. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of caries in either primary or permanent teeth although the trend in both cases was for slightly more disease in children who had used the test paste.
A three-year, double blind, randomised clinical trial was conducted in Polk County, Florida from 1983-1987. The objective was to compare the effect of four dose levels of sodium monofluorophosphate (SMFP) and a single dose level of sodium fluoride (NaF) on DMFS, DMFT, and DFS Interproximal indices. A total of 8,027 children were examined clinically and radiographically at baseline, and 5,474 children completed the three-year study, which included daily supervised brushing at school. No differences existed at baseline between the five study cells on age or gender distribution, or on any of the dental indices. Results indicated that the 2000 ppm F NaF group had significantly smaller DMFS increment than the 2000 ppm F SMFP group p < 0.005. The 2000 ppm F NaF group demonstrated an 18 per cent (26 per cent for children > 10 years at baseline) reduction in DMFS over the 1500 ppm F SMFP group, the 2500 ppm F group a 15 per cent (19 per cent) reduction, and the 2000 ppm F SMFP a 5 per cent (9 per cent) reduction. Results are strongest in children at greatest risk--older children with previous caries. This study concludes that the anticaries efficacy of SMFP dentifrices rises with increasing fluoride, and that the anticaries efficacy of a 2000 ppm NaF dentifrice is superior to that of a 2000 ppm F SMFP dentifrice, p < 0.005).
This study evaluated the dose-response relationship between four increasing levels of fluoride from 1000 to 2500 ppm F as sodium monofluorophosphate (MFP) and three-year dental caries increments, as measured by DMFS, DMFT, and DFS-A on 4424 schoolchildren. The results indicated consistent linear decreases in all three dental indices as the dose level increased to 2500 ppm F MFP, with slopes (average reductions) of 0.32 in DMFS for an increase of 1000 ppm F, 0.13 in DMFT, and 0.17 in DFS-A when all children were evaluated, p less than 0.03 for each index. For children 11 years and older at baseline, the slopes quadrupled, p less than 0.01 for each index. Age and baseline DMFS were shown to be the most important covariates to control for in the statistical models. No differences in adverse reactions, or other safety problems, were observed at the different dose levels.
A supervised brushing program was incorporated into a three-year caries clinical trial whose primary objective was to compare the efficacy between two fluoride levels of a dentifrice (1,000 and 1,500 ppm F MFP). For each of the 2,415 children completing the three-year study, the total number of supervised brushing sessions completed was available. Results indicated that children who complied well with the supervised brushing program by participating in at least 70% of the sessions had a significantly lower caries increment in both fluoride levels (p less than .001) than children who did not comply as well. After adjusting for age, sex, and baseline DMFS of the children, as well as the fluoride level received, a multiple regression model showed that supervised brushing further reduced the three year caries increment (p less than .04). The more frequent use of the higher fluoride dentifrice affords the greatest prevention of decay. The conclusion from this study is that compliance with the supervised brushing program resulted in a reduced caries increment regardless of the level of fluoride in the dentifrice.
A 3-year, double-blind, randomized caries trial was conducted to evaluate the relative anticaries efficacy of four sodium fluoride dentifrices containing 250 ppm fluoride, 1,000 ppm fluoride in combination with 1% disodium 1-hydroxyethylidene-1.1-bisphosphonate (HEBP), and 1,000 ppm fluoride in combination with 1% disodium azacycloheptylidene-2.2-bisphosphonate (AHBP). As a positive control, a monofluorophosphate dentifrice (1,000 ppm fluoride) was used. At outset 1,161 Icelandic children, 11 and 12 years of age, were randomly assigned to one of the five treatment groups and 1,035 subjects completed the trial. After 3 years of unsupervised brushing, the dentifrice containing 250 ppm fluoride was significantly less effective in controlling the caries increment. The combination of sodium fluoride and AHBP was significantly more effective than the positive control.
In this double-blind trial, the anticaries effectiveness of a test toothpaste formulated for young children with 550 ppm F was compared with that of a positive control toothpaste containing 1055 ppm fluoride. More than 3000 2-year-old children were enrolled in the study and after 3 years of toothpaste use, 2177 (72 per cent) were examined. From a clinical and radiographic assessment, more than half the children were found to be caries free and only 32 (1.5 per cent) had evidence of rampant caries. There appeared to be little or no difference between children who had used test or control pastes, either in caries or in plaque levels. On the basis of this clinical trial the experimental toothpaste with 550 ppm fluoride would appear to have a similar anticaries efficacy to that of the control toothpaste. Differences were seen in relation to sex of the child and to social class. Girls had lower levels of plaque than boys but more carious teeth. Children from families in higher social classes had fewer carious teeth and lower levels of plaque.
A 3-yr clinical trial has been conducted on 3000 12-yr-old children in Lanarkshire, Scotland, with the aim of investigating the effects on oral health of toothpastes containing both sodium monofluorophosphate and zinc citrate, the former being present at fluoride levels of 1000, 1500, and 2500 ppm F. No significant difference in caries increments was found between the group of children using toothpastes incorporating zinc citrate and their counterparts using zinc-free pastes. However, a significant anti-caries dose-response was demonstrated over the SMFP range used. This dose-response was evident for boys and girls and also for the various types of teeth and tooth surfaces.
A 3-yr daily supervised toothbrushing study with a double blind design was conducted to evaluate the anticaries effectiveness of a 1.14% sodium monofluorophosphate (MFP) dentifrice (1500 ppm F) compared to a 0.76% MFP dentifrice (1000 ppm F). This study began with nearly 4000 children, primarily aged 8-11, in grades 3-5, residing in a nonfluoridated community in Florida. A total of 2415 children completed 3 yr of the study, representing 61% of the children who began the study. The results indicate a statistically significant (P less than 0.001) anticaries benefit was derived over a 3-yr period from the use of the higher fluoride dentifrice (1500 ppm F) when compared to the positive control (1000 ppm F). Percent reductions in mean dental caries increments were 20.9%, 22.1%, 21.8%, 24.3%, and 35.2% for DMFT, DFT, DMFS, DFS, and DFS Interproximal, respectively.
This study compared the anticaries effects of these three fluoride-containing dentifrices: 1100 ppm F as NaF (positive control); 2800 ppm F as SMFP; and 2800 ppm F as NaF. The group using the 2800 SMFP dentifrice showed no significant differences in DMFS or DMFT, compared to the positive control, at anytime during the study. This indicated that higher levels of sodium monofluorophosphate in a dentifrice offer no advantage in caries protection over the conventional level of sodium fluoride, 1100 ppm F.
751 14- and 15-year old children completed a 3-year, double-blind, caries preventive program. The effects of daily, supervised toothbrushing with an 0.76% sodium monofluorophosphate dentifrice, rinsing with a 0.05% sodium fluoride mouthrinse, and the combined effects of the two treatments were investigated. Both the dentifrice and mouthrinse reduced the incidence of dental caries, but their combined use at the same time had no greater effect than either used alone.
A clinical trial of a dentifrice containing 2% sodium monofluorophosphate was carried out on 782 schoolchildren in Shropshire, England. After 3 years, a reduction of 23.8% was found in the DMFS increment obtained from clinical examination. The reduction was 38.8% using radiographs. The children were divided into three groups according to baseline DMFS. Those with a "medium" caries experience were found to benefit most from using the dentifrice. There was a difference in the effect on individual tooth sites; the approximal surfaces of the posterior teeth received the most benefit and the occlusal surfaces the least.
This study aimed to evaluate the risk-benefit balance of several fluoride exposures. Fluoride exposure history of randomly selected children was collected for calculation of exposure to fluoridated water, toothpaste, and other fluoride sources. We evaluated the risk-benefit balance of fluoride exposure by comparing dental fluorosis on maxillary central incisors, recorded at the time of the study with the use of the Thylstrup and Fejerskov Index, and deciduous caries experience, recorded at age six years, of the same group of South Australian children who were from 8 to 13 years old in 2002-03. Population Attributable Risk for fluorosis and Population Prevented Fraction for caries were estimated. Fluorosis prevalence was found to be 11.3%; caries prevalence, 32.3%; mean dmfs, 1.57 (SD 3.3). Exposure to fluoridated water was positively associated with fluorosis, but was negatively associated with caries. Using 1000-ppm-F toothpaste (compared with 400- to 550-ppm-F toothpaste) and eating/licking toothpaste were associated with higher risk of fluorosis without additional benefit in caries protection. Evaluation of the risk-benefit balance of fluoride exposure provides evidence to assist in the formulation of appropriate guidelines for fluoride use.
The paper deals with the determination of infusion therapy tactics in critically ill patients with intracranial hemorrhages on the basis of invasive measurements of systemic hemodynamics. The routine hemodynamic parameters (blood and central venous pressures, heart rate) are noted to fail to assess the volemic status of the patients in full. Unlike the use of colloidal solutions, infusion therapy with physiological sodium chloride is not shown to correct systemic hemodynamics. It has been ascertained that in acute intracranial hemorrhages, infusion therapy with crystalloidal solutions leads to impaired pulmonary gas exchange and increased pulmonary extravascular fluid and the use of a combination of crystalloidal solutions and a colloidal agent in a 1:1 ratio can correct the volemic status of the patients and is not followed by lung dysfunctions.
We studied the long-term efficacy and safety of medium-molecular-weight hydroxyethyl starch (HES) administered in doses above 20 ml.kg-1 during major blood replacement therapy. Blood replacement for 50 patients used 6% HES 200/0.5 (HES group) or 5% albumin (ALB group) and additional blood components according to a defined protocol. We compared safety, efficacy and costs in 4 peri-operative days. Colloid administration on the day of surgery was 38.4 ml.kg-1 (HES group) and 35.1 ml.kg-1 (ALB group). Haemodynamic, coagulation and renal function parameters were similar. Although total serum protein was still different on the third postoperative day (53.45 gl-1 (HES group) and 60.6 gl-1 (ALB group) (p < 0.01)) the colloid osmotic pressure always remained above 19.5 (2.5) mmHg (HES group). Blood loss (3810 (1632) ml (HES group) and 3455 (1733) ml (ALB group)) and the requirement for blood components was comparable. Costs were reduced by 35% (p < 0.05) in the HES group. We conclude that using 6% HES 200/0.5 as the only colloid for treatment even of large blood loss is a safe and economic alternative to albumin.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to determine whether the addition of the middle cerebral to umbilical artery systolic/diastolic velocity waveform ratio to the modified biophysical profile would improve perinatal outcome in patients at high risk. STUDY DESIGN: A prospective, randomized outcome study of patients referred to the perinatal laboratory for antenatal surveillance was undertaken. Six hundred sixty-five patients were randomized to two antenatal surveillance protocols: group 1, modified biophysical profile; and group 2, modified biophysical profile plus evaluation of the middle cerebral artery to umbilical artery systolic/diastolic ratio. Patients were followed up serially and neonatal outcome data including gestational age at delivery, birth weight, incidence of cesarean section delivery for fetal distress, admission to the neonatal intensive care unit, days in the neonatal intensive care unit, and the presence of significant neonatal morbidity were tabulated. RESULTS: The total population showed no statistical difference in outcome parameters between groups 1 and 2. However, a subgroup of patients evaluated for suspected uteroplacental insufficiency did show a significant reduction in caesarean section for fetal distress in group 2 patients. CONCLUSIONS: In a subgroup of patients at risk for uteroplacental insufficiency, the addition of the middle cerebral/umbilical artery ratio to an antenatal surveillance protocol should be expected to improve perinatal outcome.
BACKGROUND: In a previous prospective randomised trial on pregnancies complicated by small-for-gestational-age fetuses fewer operative deliveries for fetal distress were found after antenatal surveillance with umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry (Doppler group) than after surveillance with cardiotocography (CTG group). Despite that, the neonatal outcome was similar in both groups. This raised the question whether the knowledge of the antenatal Doppler results had influenced the obstetric management of labor. METHODS: In this retrospective study 242 intrapartum cardiotocogram tracings, obtained from the above mentioned prospective trial, were re-interpreted by an expert without knowledge of the results in the original study. The re-interpretation was then compared to the original interpretation. RESULTS: The expert interpreted 18 intrapartum tracings in the Doppler group and 18 in the CTG group as abnormal, whereas the clinicians interpreted only 8 tracings as abnormal in the Doppler group and 18 tracings in the CTG group. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this retrospective study lend support to our hypothesis that the obstetricians in clinical practice are influenced by the knowledge of a normal umbilical Doppler velocimetry when interpreting an intrapartum CTG. This finding may partly explain why there were fewer emergency cesarean sections for fetal distress in the Doppler group than in the CTG group in the original prospective study.
One-hundred and eighty-seven single pregnancies, at full term determined accurately and confirmed by ultrasound before 17 weeks of amenorrhea and which were proceeding normally were monitored every 2 days after the expected end of term. This was done by conventional methods and in 132 cases by determining a placental resistance index (R = D/S). All the deliveries were carried out under monitoring and the infants examined by a pediatrician. The umbilical index at 280 to 300 days of gestation was found to be constant and equal to R = 0.52 +/- 0.041 (n +/- D) and the signs of fetal distress and post-maturity increased beyond term. In the first 80 pregnancies studies in this way, the determination of the value of the index R was not included in the decision-making process. Twelve of the 14 cases of fetal heart rate arrhythmia during delivery and all recorded cases of post-mature clinical signs and neonatal acidosis occurred when the index was above RI = 0.54. The next 107 pregnancies were randomly divided into two groups. In the 52 pregnancies in which the Doppler revealed an index at two consecutive determinations in excess of 0.54, this was taken to be a criterion for the induction of childbirth. In this group, some of the women gave birth earlier, without any increase in the number of Caesareans and this resulted in fewer post-mature infants.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
HIV+adolescents (M CD4=466 mm3) recruited from a large urban university hospital's outpatient clinic were randomly assigned to receive massage therapy (n=12) or progressive muscle relaxation (n=12) two-times per week for 12 weeks. To assess treatment effects, participants were assessed for depression, anxiety and immune changes before and after treatment the 12 weeks treatment period. Adolescents who received massage therapy versus those who experienced relaxation therapy reported feeling less anxious and they were less depressed, and showed enhanced immune function by the end of the 12 week study. Immune changes included increased Natural Killer cell number (CD56) and CD56+CD3-. In addition, the HIV disease progression markers CD4/CD8 ratio and CD4 number showed an increase for the massage therapy group only.
A prospective, randomized study was performed in order to evaluate the effect of cefotiam in the prevention of postoperative infectious morbidity in patients undergoing low-risk elective cesarean section. A total of 146 patients were randomly assigned to receive either intraoperative single-shot prophylaxis with 2 g cefotiam (study group, n =76) or no prophylaxis (control group, n=70). Due to a higher rate of urinary tract infections, the incidence of infectious morbidity after cefotiam prophylaxis was higher in the study group than in the control group (16% vs. 9%, P=0.1). Postoperative infectious morbidity following low-risk elective cesarean section cannot be reduced by intraoperative cefotiam prophylaxis.
OBJECTIVE: To test the value of using prophylactic antibiotics at elective cesarean delivery. METHOD: One-hundred and twenty women delivered by elective cesarean in the absence of labor and before the rupture of membranes were randomized to receive either 1.5 g of cefuroxime intravenously at cord clamping (n = 59) or no prophylaxis (control group, n = 61). RESULTS: Twelve women developed febrile morbidity (six study, six control, P = 0.09). Of these, five had endometritis (two study, three control, P = 0.09) and two had wound infection (one study, one control, P = 0.09). Ten more women had microbiological evidence of endometritis and wound infection (six study, four control, P = 0.08). There was no significant difference in the hospital stay (6.5 days study, 6.8 days control, P = 0.06). Staphylococcus aureus was the commonest pathogen accounting for 14 infection episodes. Amniotic fluid culture could not predict the development of infection. CONCLUSION: Administration of prophylactic antibiotics at elective cesarean deliveries was not associated with decreased postoperative morbidity.
BACKGROUND: To study the effect of single-dose prophylactic Augmentin on patients undergoing cesarean section. METHODS AND MATERIAL: Three hundred and twenty women undergoing cesarean section were randomized into two groups in a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. One hundred and sixty women were allocated to receive a single-dose of 1.2 g Augmentin at induction of anesthesia and 160 were allocated to a control group who received placebo. The following post-cesarean outcome parameters were compared between the two groups: duration of hospital stay, febrile morbidity, urine microscopy, bacteriuria, endometritis, and wound infection. RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the two groups with respect to the duration of post-operative hospital stay or the incidence of febrile morbidity, endometritis, and wound infection. However, the study group had fewer post-operative abnormalities in urine microscopy (p < 0.05) and bacteriuria (p < 0.01). The bacterial flora were also different between the two groups. CONCLUSION: Single-dose prophylactic Augmentin did not produce any clinically significant improvement in the post-operative course of patients undergoing cesarean section. If proper surgical techniques are followed in association with closed rectus sheath drainage, it is unlikely that any trial of antibiotics will be able to demonstrate any clinically significant outcome.
This prospective, randomised, controlled trial was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of single-dose antibiotic prophylaxis in decreasing the infectious morbidity following elective caesarean section. Two hundred women undergoing elective caesarean section were randomly assigned to receive either 1.2 g of Augmentin intravenously, or no treatment, just before the start of their caesarean section. The two groups of women were comparable in terms of patient characteristics and operation variables. The overall postoperative morbidity rate was 19% in the Augmentin treated group versus 38% in the group that received no prophylaxis (p < 0.01). The incidence of wound sepsis was 3% in the Augmentin group versus 13% in the control group (p < 0.01). The incidence of febrile morbidity with no identifiable cause was 8% in the Augmentin group versus 18% in the control group (p < 0.05). The duration of hospital stay was significantly shorter in the Augmentin group (p < 0.05). A single-dose of prophylactic Augmentin significantly reduced the postoperative morbidity and duration of hospital stay in women who underwent elective caesarean sections.
A study was conducted to assess whether antibiotic prophylaxis in low-risk patients for post-cesarean febrile morbidity was beneficial and cost effective. In a randomized, prospective study, 167 patients received a single, 1-g dose of cefazolin before clamping of the cord, and 140 did not. In the group given prophylaxis the febrile morbidity and postoperative therapeutic antibiotic usage were significantly lower than in the group not given prophylaxis (9% vs. 17.9%, P = .035, and 6.5% vs. 20%, P < .001, respectively). We conclude that single-dose cefazolin prophylaxis is both beneficial and cost effective, even in patients considered to be at low risk of post-cesarean febrile morbidity. Since the value of antibiotic prophylaxis in high-risk patients is accepted, universal antibiotic prophylaxis in every cesarean section case is suggested.
A prospective randomised controlled study was conducted over a 6 month period on the value of administering prophylactic antibiotics in patients undergoing emergency caesarean section at the Ipoh General Hospital. A total of 222 patients were randomised to receive 24 hours of ampicillin (500 mg per dose), cefoperazone (1 gm per dose) or no antibiotics. In all parameters of patient morbidity, the group receiving cefoperazone showed significantly better results as compared to the group not receiving antibiotics. The ampicillin group also had favourable results but generally not achieving statistical significance. Prophylactic antibiotics appear to be beneficial and consideration should be given to make it a routine in all emergency caesarean sections.
The efficacy of intravenous metronidazole for the prevention of postcesarean section infectious morbidity was studied in 100 healthy women, randomly given either the drug or a placebo. The metronidazole group received 1.0 g intravenously, immediately after cord clamping. Among the 50 patients who received metronidazole, endometritis developed in 7 (14%) as it did in 15 (30%) of the placebo group (P less than 0.01); wound infection was found in 1 (2%) and 4 (8%), respectively (P less than 0.01). If both infectious complications are compared together, the difference (16% versus 38%) is more significant (P less than 0.001). Metronidazole was well tolerated by the mother and with this type of administration regimen, the fetus is not exposed to the drug. It is concluded that metronidazole, used as here reported, is effective in reducing the frequency of postcesarean section endometritis and wound infection with the consequent clinical and economic impacts.
The objective of this investigation was to determine the effectiveness of ampicillin administration as a prophylactic regime in patients undergoing cesarean section. A double blind randomized study compared a long course of ampicillin (7 days) to a short course of ampicillin (three doses) to placebo. Thirty one patients were included in the placebo group and sixty patients in the drug groups. Only one patient in the placebo group and one in the drug group developed infectious morbidity. There was no significant difference (p less than 0.001) between the placebo and ampicillin groups.
A prospective randomized study was undertaken to evaluate the efficacy of a single dose of cefuroxime in alleviating infectious complications following non-elective cesarean section. One hundred and two women were allocated to receive 750 mg of cefuroxime after cord clamping and 99 were allocated to a control group not receiving any antibiotic prophylaxis. The incidence of febrile morbidity was 2.0% in the cefuroxime group and 19.2% in the control group (p less than 0.001). The incidence of endometritis in the two groups was 1.0% and 6.1%, respectively, the incidence of fever of unknown origin was 1.0% and 9.1%, respectively. Single-dose cefuroxime prophylaxis significantly reduced the incidence of febrile morbidity in patients undergoing non-elective cesarean section, without producing any side effects.
A prospective, double-blind randomized trial was carried out at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, involving 4 groups of patients receiving a single intravenous dose of placebo, ampicillin, ampicillin and metronidazole, and ampicillin and sulbactam before operation. No difference in postoperative morbidity was present between the 4 groups of patients.
One hundred and eighty two patients undergoing elective and emergency cesarean section were entered in a randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial of short course metronidazole rectal suppositories. There was a significant reduction in wound infection, febrile morbidity and postoperative hospitalization in the treated group. The reduction was greatest for serious wound infection. The simplicity and low cost of the regimen make it suitable for hospitals in developing countries.
A prospective, randomised study was carried out on 110 patients to find out the effect of giving Cefotetan prophylactically as against no treatment in the prevention of infections after cesarean sections. The cases were selected before or at the beginning of a trial of labour in 72 cases and after a failure of trial of labour in 38 cases. A single dose of 2 gr of Cefotetan was given during the operation, after the cord had been clamped. It caused a significant drop in infection and in particular the number of cases of endometritis and urinary tract infections, which were twice as common in the non-treated as compared with the treated group.
The rate of postoperative infections after cesarean section was studied in a prospective double-blind randomized study to compare cefuroxim with a placebo. Intravenous bolus injections were given at the beginning of, and 12h after the operation. Eighty patients received cefuroxim and 80 received placebo. Endometritis or wound infection, or both, was diagnosed in 2/80 (2.5%) patients receiving cefuroxim and in 23/80 (29%) patients receiving placebo. No side effects were demonstrated or reported by the patients. Thus, two bolus injections of 1.5 g of cefuroxim given perioperatively significantly reduced postoperative infectious morbidity after emergency cesarean section.
In a double-blind randomized controlled study 232 patients undergoing elective lower segment caesarean section were randomly allocated to receive a pre-operative prophylactic dose of a combination of crystalline penicillin and chloramphenicol or a placebo. The two groups were comparable in terms of patient characteristics and operation variables. The group receiving antibiotics had significantly fewer febrile and infectious morbid events and thus spent fewer days in hospital than the group receiving the placebo.
In the United States, several well-designed studies have demonstrated the efficacy of short-course antibiotic prophylaxis in cesarean sections. The present prospective study was conducted on 150 patients in a Dutch university hospital in a randomized double-blind fashion. Cefoxitin was administered according to a three-dose, 12 h regimen, the first injection given immediately after clamping of the umbilical cord. The rate of infection among the patients was significantly reduced by prophylaxis, judging from febrile morbidity, endometritis, wound infections, urinary tract infections and need for postoperative antibiotic therapy. The prophylactic use of the cefoxitin was especially effective in the secondary cesarean section population. Three risk factors significantly correlated with increased risk of infection: labor, rupture of membranes and pelvic examination. Postoperative cervical cultures showed a significant reduction of bacteria in the cefoxitin group. No shift towards resistant pathogens was demonstrable.
Patients having a cesarean section more than 6 h after rupture of the membranes constitute a high risk group for postoperative infections. Two such groups were studied. Patients were given either cefuroxime 1.5 g every 8th hour for 24 h followed by cefadroxil 0.5 g twice daily for 6 days or received no medication. The infection rate was significantly reduced in the treatment group as compared to the control group (15% vs. 48%). Non-infected patients had a significantly shorter stay in hospital (8 days vs. 12 days). Combined use of these drugs for prevention of post-cesarean infection has not previously been reported. No side effects of the antibiotic prophylaxis were reported.
Single-dose trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis after clamping of the umbilical cord decreased the rate of endomyometritis in high-risk patients by 50% when compared with placebo. This drug combination may affect the normal flora of the cervix the least so that superinfections should be rare.
Two hundred twenty-three women who underwent cesarean section delivery were studied to assess the effectiveness of operative antibiotic irrigation in preventing postoperative uterine infection. Patients were prospectively randomized into high-risk and low-risk groups according to length of labor, and received irrigation with either a 2 gm solution of cefamandole or normal saline solution, or no irrigation. Infection rates of 48.6% and 54.8% were observed in high-risk patients given either saline solution or no irrigation, respectively. Three of 27 high-risk patients (11.1%) given antibiotic irrigation developed metritis. The authors find this method of preventing infection to be advantageous in terms of both efficacy and minimization of antibiotic exposure.
A prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was performed to determine the effectiveness of single-dose antibiotic prophylaxis in decreasing infectious complications after primary cesarean section. One hundred women at high risk for postoperative infectious morbidity were randomly assigned to receive either placebo or one 2-g dose of ceftizoxime at cord clamping. The incidence of endometritis in the antibiotic group was 6.0 versus 24.5% in the placebo group (P less than .05). The incidence of febrile morbidity in the group receiving one dose of ceftizoxime was 14.0 versus 32.7% in the placebo group (P less than .05). Single-dose ceftizoxime prophylaxis significantly reduced the incidence of endometritis and febrile morbidity in high-risk patients undergoing cesarean section.
A single 5-gm dose of mezlocillin or a placebo was administered intravenously 30 minutes before surgery to patients undergoing emergency cesarean section. The assignment of drug or placebo was randomized. Postoperative morbidity occurred in 62.5% of patients receiving placebo and in 18.4% of those receiving mezlocillin (P less than 0.001). The incidences of febrile morbidity, endometritis, and urinary tract infection were significantly lower in the group given mezlocillin. Other benefits of antibiotic prophylaxis included a shorter hospital stay and no serious infections in the group given mezlocillin.
The purpose of this prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was to clarify the effect of a single intravenous infusion of 500 mg of tinidazole on infections that followed a caesarean section. 80 consecutive caesarean-section patients and thereafter 72 women undergoing non-elective caesarean section were randomly assigned to two groups, each receiving intravenous infusions at cord clamping. In the entire sample the incidence of endometritis/wound infection in the placebo group was 27.3% (21/77) versus 10.7% (8/75) in the tinidazole group (p less than 0.01). In the non-elective caesarean-section group the incidence of endometritis/wound infection was 39.6% (21/53) in the placebo group versus 14.3% (7/49) in the tinidazole group (p less than 0.01). 27 positive bacterial cultures yielded a pure anaerobic growth in 59% (16/27) of cases, of which 87.5% (14/16) were treated successfully with oral tinidazole.
